	
	
	

Raiders	from	the	North
	
	
	

	
	

Raiders	from	the	North
EMPIRE	OF	THE	MOGHUL

Alex	Rutherford
	
	
	
	

Thomas	Dunne	Books
St.	Martin’s	Press
New	York

	
	
	
This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	of	the	characters,	organizations,	and	events	portrayed	in	this	novel	are	either	products	of	the	author’s	imagination
or	are	used	fictitiously.

	
THOM AS	DUNNE	BOOKS.
An	imprint	of	St.	Martin’s	Press.

	
RAIDERS	FROM 	THE	NORTH.	Copyright	©	2009	by	Alex	Rutherford.	All	rights	reserved.	Printed	in	the	United	States	of	America.	For

information,	address	St.	Martin’s	Press,	175	Fifth	Avenue,	New	York,	N.Y.	10010.

	
www.thomasdunnebooks.com
www.stmartins.com

	
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data

	
Rutherford,	Alex,	1948Raiders	from	the	north	:	empire	of	the	Moghul	/Alex
Rutherford.—1st	U.S.	ed.
p.	cm.
				ISBN	978-0-312-59700-9
1.	 Farghona	 (Uzbekistan)—History—Fiction.	 2.	 Babur,	 Emperor	 of	 Hindustan,	 1483-1530—Fiction.	 3.	 Mogul	 Empire—HistoryFiction.	4.	Mogul	Empire—Kings	and	rulers—Fiction.	I.Title.
PR6118.U92R35	2010
823'.92—dc22

2010002336
	
First	published	in	Great	Britain	by	Headline	Review,	an	imprint	of	Headline	Publishing	Group

	
First	U.S.	Edition:	May	2010

	
10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1

	
	
	

Sketch	Map	of	Babur’s	World

	
	
	

Samarkand

	
	
	

Main	Characters
	
Babur’s	parents,	siblings,	grandmother	and	uncle
Ahmed,	King	of	Samarkand,	Babur’s	uncle
Esan	Dawlat,	Babur’s	maternal	grandmother
Jahangir,	Babur’s	half-brother
Khanzada,	Babur’s	older	sister
Kutlugh	Nigar,	Babur’s	mother
Umar-Shaikh,	King	of	Ferghana,	Babur’s	father
	
Babur’s	wives
Ayisha,	daughter	of	the	chief	of	the	Mangligh	clan
Maham,	Babur’s	favourite	wife	and	mother	of	Humayun
Gulrukh,	mother	of	Kamran	and	Askari
Bibi	Mubarak,	daughter	of	the	chief	of	the	Yusufzai	clan
Dildar,	mother	of	Hindal
	
Babur’s	sons
Humayun
Kamran
Askari
Hindal
	
Babur’s	cousins
Azar	Khan,	nobleman	of	Ferghana
Mahmud,	Prince	of	Kunduz
Mirza	Khan,	chieftain	of	Ferghana
Tambal,	nobleman	of	Ferghana
	
Babur’s	inner	circle

Baburi,	a	former	market	boy	and	Babur’s	closest	friend
Baisanghar,	 originally	 an	 officer	 of	 Samarkand,	 subsequently	 Babur’s	 loyal	 commander	 and,	 even
later,	father-in-law
Kasim,	one	of	Babur’s	political	advisers,	often	used	by	him	as	an	ambassador
Wazir	Khan,	milk-brother	to	Babur’s	father	and	Babur’s	guide	and	chief	mentor	in	his	childhood	and
early	years	as	king
Abdul-Malik,	a	physician
	
Ferghana
Baba	Qashqa,	comptroller	of	the	royal	household
Baqi	Beg,	court	astrologer
Fatima,	chief	waiting	woman
Qambar-Ali,	vizier
Rehana,	an	old	woman	whose	grandfather	rode	with	Timur	to	sack	Delhi
Roxanna,	concubine	of	Babur’s	father	and	mother	of	Jahangir
Walid	Butt,	Esan	Dawlat’s	steward
Yadgar,	Babur’s	favourite	inhabitant	of	a	Ferghana	brothel
Yusuf,	keeper	of	the	treasury
	
Babur’s	tribal	leaders
Ali-Dost,	a	chieftain	from	western	Ferghana
Ali	Gosht,	Babur’s	master-of-horse	and	later	chief	quartermaster
Ali	Mazid	Beg,	lord	of	Shahrukiyyah
Baba	Yasaval,	warrior	from	near	Herat
Hussain	Mazid,	headman	of	Sayram	and	cousin	of	Ali	Mazid	Beg
	
Babur’s	chief	enemy	in	Central	Asia
Shaibani	Khan,	powerful	leader	of	the	Uzbek	clans	and	blood	enemy	of	Babur’s	people	and	all	those
descended	from	Timur
	
Persia
Shah	Ismail	of	Persia
Mullah	Husayn,	Shiite	mullah	serving	Shah	Ismail
	
Turkey
Ali-Quli,	master-gunner
	
Kabul
Bahlul	Ayyub,	grand	vizier
Haydar	Taqi,	keeper	of	the	Royal	Seal

Muhammad-Muquim	Arghun,	chief	of	the	Hazaras
Wali	Gul,	guardian	of	the	Royal	Treasuries
	
Hindustan
Buwa,	mother	of	Sultan	Ibrahim	Lodi
Firoz	Khan,	Hindustani	warlord
Gwalior	royal	family,	owners	of	the	Koh-i-Nur	diamond,	the	‘Mountain	of	Light’
Rana	Sanga,	Hindu	ruler	of	the	Rajput	state	of	Mewar
Sultan	Ibrahim	Lodi,	ruler	of	the	great	Delhi	Sultanate	and	overlord	of	Hindustan
Roshanna,	Buwa’s	serving	woman
	
Babur’s	ancestors
Genghis	Khan
Timur,	known	in	the	West	as	Tamburlaine	from	a	corruption	of	‘Timur-i-Lang’,	‘Timur	the	Lame’

Mountain	of	Light
I	do	not	write	this	to	complain;	I	have	written	the	plain	truth.	I	do	not	write	to	praise	myself	but	to	set
down	exactly	what	happened.	In	this	history	I	have	been	determined	to	write	truthfully	about	everything.
As	 a	 consequence	 I	 have	 set	 down	 all	 that	 is	 good	 or	 bad	 I	 have	 seen	 of	 father,	 kinsman	 or	 stranger.
Reader,	pardon	this	.	.	.
Diary	of	Babur,	Founder	of	the	Moghul	Empire

	
	
	

Part	I
Timur’s	Heir

	
	
	

Chapter	1
Death	Among	the	Doves
	
	

In	 a	 small	 dusty	 fortress	 in	 Central	 Asia	 in	 the	 summer	 of	 1494,	 the	 baked-mud	 battlements,	 grey	 as
elephant’s	hide	in	daytime,	were	pinkening	before	Babur’s	eyes	with	the	sunset.	Far	beneath,	the	Jaxartes
river	gleamed	a	dull	red	as	it	flowed	westward	across	the	darkening	plains.	Babur	shifted	his	weight	on
the	stone	step	and	returned	his	attention	to	his	father,	the	king,	who	was	pacing	the	fortress	walls,	hands
clasped	against	the	turquoise	fastenings	of	his	robes.	His	face	was	working	excitedly	as	he	launched	into
the	story	his	twelve-year-old	son	had	heard	so	many	times	before.	But	it	was	worth	the	retelling,	Babur
reflected.	 He	 listened	 carefully,	 alert	 for	 the	 new	 embellishments	 that	 always	 crept	 in.	 His	 lips	 moved
with	his	father’s	when	the	king	reached	the	climax	–	the	one	part	that	never	changed,	each	of	its	grandiose
phrases	sacrosanct.
‘And	so	it	happened	that	our	ancestor	the	great	Timur	–	Timur	the	Warrior,	whose	name	meant	“Iron”
and	whose	horses	sweated	blood	as	he	galloped	through	the	world	–	won	a	vast	empire.	Though	he	was
so	 cruelly	 injured	 in	 his	 youth	 that	 one	 leg	 was	 longer	 than	 the	 other	 and	 he	 walked	 with	 a	 limp,	 he
conquered	from	Delhi	to	the	Mediterranean,	from	wealthy	Persia	to	the	wildernesses	along	the	Volga.	But
was	that	enough	for	Timur?	Of	course	not!	Even	when	many	years	were	upon	him,	he	was	still	strong	and
robust	in	body,	hard	like	a	rock,	his	ambition	boundless.
His	 final	 enterprise	 was	 ninety	 years	 ago	 against	 China.	 He	 rode	 out	 with	 the	 thunder	 of	 two	 hundred
thousand	horsemen	in	his	ears	and	victory	would	have	been	his,	had	Allah	not	summoned	him	to	rest	with
him	 in	 Paradise.	 But	 how	 did	 Timur,	 this	 greatest	 of	 warriors	 –	 greater	 even	 than	 your	 other	 ancestor
Genghis	Khan	–	do	all	this?	I	see	the	question	in	your	eyes,	my	son,	and	you	are	right	to	ask	it.’
The	king	patted	Babur’s	head	approvingly,	seeing	that	he	held	his	complete	attention.	Then	he	resumed,
voice	rising	and	falling	with	poetic	fervour.
‘Timur	was	clever	and	brave	but,	above	all,	he	was	a	great	leader	of	men.	My	grandfather	told	me	that
his	eyes	were	like	candles	without	brilliance.	Once	men	looked	into	those	slits	of	muted	light	they	could
not	turn	away.	And	as	Timur	gazed	into	their	souls	he	spoke	of	glory	that	would	echo	through	the	centuries
and	stir	the	lifeless	dust	that	would	be	all	that	was	left	of	their	bones	on	earth.	He	spoke	of	gleaming	gold
and	shimmering	gems.	He	spoke	of	fine-boned	women	whose	black	hair	hung	like	curtains	of	silk	such	as
they	had	seen	in	the	slave	markets	of	his	capital	of	Samarkand.	Above	all	he	spoke	of	their	birthright,	their
right	to	be	the	possessors	of	the	earth.	And	as	Timur’s	deep	voice	flowed	over	and	around	them,	visions
filled	their	minds	of	what	was	theirs	for	the	taking	until	they	would	have	followed	him	through	the	burning
gates	of	hell.
‘Not	that	Timur	was	a	barbarian,	my	son.’	The	king	shook	his	head	vigorously	so	that	the	fringe	he	liked
to	leave	hanging	from	his	maroon	silk	turban	swung	from	side	to	side.	‘No.	He	was	a	cultured	man.	His
great	city	of	Samarkand	was	a	place	of	grace	and	beauty,	of	scholarship	and	learning.	But	Timur	knew	that
a	conqueror	must	let	nothing	–	no	one	–	stand	in	his	way.	Ruthlessness	ruled	his	soul	until	the	job	was
done	and	the	more	who	knew	it	the	better.’	He	closed	his	eyes,	picturing	the	glory	days	of	his	magnificent

ancestor.	 He	 had	 worked	 himself	 into	 such	 a	 lather	 of	 pride	 and	 excitement	 that	 beads	 of	 sweat	 were
bursting	out	on	his	forehead.	He	took	a	yellow	silk	scarf	and	mopped	it.
Exhilarated	as	usual	by	the	images	his	father	had	conjured,	Babur	smiled	up	at	him	to	show	he	shared
the	 same	 joyous	 pride.	 But	 even	 as	 he	 watched,	 his	 father’s	 face	 changed.	 The	 fervent	 light	 in	 his	 dark
eyes	faded	and	his	expression	grew	despondent,	even	brooding.	Babur’s	smile	faltered.	His	father’s	story
usually	finished	with	this	paean	to	Timur,	but	today	the	king	continued,	his	tone	bleak,	the	vibrancy	gone.
‘But	I	–	descendant	of	the	great	Timur	though	I	am	–	what	have	I?	Just	Ferghana,	a	kingdom	not	two
hundred	miles	long	or	one	hundred	wide.	Look	at	it	–	a	place	of	sheep	and	goats	grazing	in	valleys	ringed
on	 three	 sides	 by	 mountains.’	 He	 flung	 out	 an	 arm	 towards	 the	 soaring,	 cloud-circled	 peaks	 of	 Mount
Beshtor.	 ‘Meanwhile	 three	 hundred	 miles	 to	 the	 west	 my	 brother	 rules	 golden	 Samarkand,	 while	 south
across	 the	 Hindu	 Kush	 my	 cousin	 holds	 wealthy	 Kabul.	 I	 am	 their	 poor	 relation	 to	 be	 snubbed	 and
despised.	Yet	my	blood	–	your	blood	–	is	as	good	as	theirs.’
‘Father—’
‘Even	 so,	 all	 we	 princes	 of	 the	 house	 of	 Timur,’	 the	 king	 interrupted,	 voice	 trembling	 with	 passion,
‘what	are	any	of	us,	compared	with	him?	We	squabble	like	petty	chieftains	as	we	struggle	each	to	hold	on
to	our	own	little	scrap	of	his	empire.	I	am	as	guilty	as	any	of	the	others.’	He	sounded	really	angry	now.	‘If
Timur	came	back	today	he	would	spit	in	our	faces	for	the	fools	we	are.	We	are	so	proud	to	call	ourselves
Mirza,	“Offspring	of	the	Amir”,	so	eager	to	call	him	ancestor,	but	would	he	be	so	ready	to	acknowledge
us?	 Wouldn’t	 we	 have	 to	 fall	 on	 our	 knees	 and	 beg	 his	 forgiveness	 for	 dissipating	 our	 inheritance	 and
forgetting	our	greatness?’
The	 king’s	 strong	 hands	 gripped	 Babur’s	 shoulders	 so	 hard	 it	 hurt.	 ‘You	 are	 old	 enough	 now	 to
understand.	 That	 is	 why	 I	 am	 telling	 you	 this.	 We	 owe	 Timur	 a	 debt.	 He	 was	 a	 great	 man,	 my	 son.	 His
blood	is	your	blood.	Never	forget	it.	Be	like	him,	if	you	can.	Live	up	to	your	destiny	and	let	it	be	greater
than	mine.’
‘I	will	try,	Father	.	.	.	I	promise.’
For	a	moment,	the	king’s	eyes	searched	Babur’s	face.	Then,	seemingly	satisfied,	he	grunted	and	turned
away.	Babur	sat	very	still.	His	father’s	unexpected	passion	had	shaken	him.	As	he	digested	what	he	had
said,	he	saw	that	the	sun	was	almost	down.	Like	so	many	other	evenings,	he	watched	the	jagged	landscape
soften	in	the	dying	light.	The	cries	of	boys	herding	their	sheep	and	goats	back	to	their	villages	came	out	of
the	gathering	gloom.	So	did	a	gentle,	insistent	cooing.	His	father’s	favourite	flock	of	white	doves	were
fluttering	home	to	their	cote.
Babur	heard	a	gentle	sigh	escape	his	father’s	lips,	as	if	he	acknowledged	that	life	still	held	pleasures	as
well	 as	 disappointments.	 He	 watched	 the	 king	 take	 a	 swig	 of	 cooling	 water	 from	 the	 leather	 bottle
dangling	at	his	side	and,	his	face	relaxing	once	more	into	its	usual	good	humour,	turn	and	hurry	along	the
battlements	towards	the	conical	dovecote	high	on	top	of	the	wall	and	partly	overhanging	the	dry	ravine
below.	His	gold-embroidered	red	velvet	slippers	slapped	against	the	baked-mud	floor	and	his	arms	were
already	outstretched,	ready	to	take	his	favourite	doves	in	his	hands	and	caress	their	plump	throats	with	the
tenderness	of	a	lover.	Babur	couldn’t	see	the	attraction.	Stupid	little	birds.	The	best	place	for	them	was
plucked	and	poached	in	a	sauce	of	pomegranates	and	crushed	walnuts.
Babur’s	 mind	 returned	 to	 Timur	 and	 his	 marauding	 soldiers.	 What	 would	 it	 be	 like	 to	 feel	 that	 the
whole	world	was	yours?	To	take	a	city	and	have	its	king	writhe	in	the	dust	at	your	feet?	His	father	was
right.	How	different	it	would	be	from	ruling	just	this	little	kingdom	of	Ferghana.	The	petty	politics	of	his
father’s	court	bored	him.	The	chief	vizier,	Qambar-Ali,	stank	like	an	old	mule	in	his	sweaty	robes.	With
his	long	yellowing	teeth	he	even	looked	like	one.	And	he	was	always	up	to	something,	whispering	in	his
father’s	ear,	bloodshot	eyes	swivelling	to	see	who	was	watching.	Timur	would	have	sliced	off	the	ugly

fool’s	 head	 without	 a	 moment’s	 reflection.	 Perhaps,	 Babur	 reflected,	 he	 would	 do	 it	 himself	 when	 he
eventually	became	king.
Soon	it	would	be	time	to	pray	and	then	to	go	to	the	women’s	quarters	to	eat.	He	jumped	down	from	the
step.	At	that	moment	he	heard	a	tremendous	crack,	the	battlements	shuddered	beneath	his	feet	and	a	few
seconds	 later	 there	 came	 a	 dull	 crash.	 He	 put	 out	 a	 hand	 to	 steady	 himself	 and	 realised	 he	 could	 see
nothing.	What	was	happening?	Was	it	one	of	the	earth	tremors	that	sometimes	shook	the	castle?	No,	the
noise	 was	 somehow	 different.	 As	 he	 gasped	 in	 shock	 his	 mouth	 drew	 in	 choking	 dust	 and	 his	 eyes
streamed	involuntary	tears	as	they	attempted	to	clear	themselves.	Instinctively	Babur	put	up	his	hands	to
cover	his	face	and	head.	As	he	did	so,	he	heard	swift-running	feet,	then	felt	strong	arms	grip	him	and	haul
him	backwards.	‘Majesty,	you	are	safe.’
He	 recognised	 the	 deep	 voice.	 It	 belonged	 to	 Wazir	 Khan,	 the	 commander	 of	 his	 father’s	 bodyguard.
‘What	do	you	mean	.	.	.	?’	It	was	hard	to	talk;	his	mouth	was	dry	and	gritty,	and	his	tongue	felt	suddenly
too	large	for	it.	His	words	sounded	thick,	incomprehensible,	and	he	tried	again.	‘What’s	happened	.	.	.	?’
he	managed.	‘It	wasn’t	an	earthquake,	was	it?’
Even	as	he	asked	the	question	Babur	forced	his	watering	eyes	to	open	and	saw	the	answer	for	himself.
A	large	chunk	of	the	battlements	where	the	dovecote	had	been	had	gone,	as	if	a	giant	hand	had	reached	out
to	break	the	rim	off	a	pie	crust.	Dried	and	fissured	by	the	intense	summer	heat	it	had	suddenly	given	way.
The	doves	were	fluttering	in	the	air	like	snowflakes.
Babur	 wrenched	 himself	 from	 the	 tall	 soldier’s	 protective	 arms	 and	 rushed	 forward.	 His	 stomach
seemed	to	fall	from	his	chest	as	he	realised	he	could	not	see	his	father.	What	had	happened	to	him?
‘Majesty,	please	come	back.’
A	 cold	 sweat	 broke	 on	 his	 brow	 as	 Babur	 worked	 his	 way	 along	 what	 remained	 of	 the	 ruined
battlements	and	peered	down	into	the	ravine.	Through	the	slowly	settling	dust	he	could	just	make	out	the
remains	of	the	wall	and	the	dovecote,	pulverised	on	the	rocks.	Of	his	father	there	seemed	no	sign.	Then
Babur	 saw	 his	 maroon	 turban	 suspended	 at	 a	 jaunty	 angle	 from	 the	 branch	 of	 a	 bush	 sprouting	 from	 a
fissure	in	the	rock.	He	must	have	fallen	with	the	dovecote.	He	must	be	buried,	injured,	perhaps	even	dead,
Babur	thought,	with	a	shudder.
As	he	looked	down,	soldiers	with	flaming	torches	were	running	from	the	gate	at	the	base	of	the	fortress
and	scrambling	down	the	rocks	into	the	ravine.
‘Hurry,	 you	 fools,	 hurry!’	 yelled	 Wazir	 Khan,	 who	 had	 come	 up	 beside	 Babur	 and	 again	 taken	 a
protective	 hold	 of	 him.	 They	 watched	 in	 silence	 as,	 by	 the	 light	 of	 their	 flaring	 orange	 torches	 in	 the
gathering	dusk,	the	soldiers	clawed	through	the	rubble.	One	found	a	dead	dove	and	tossed	the	limp	little
body	impatiently	aside.	A	kite	swooped	low	and	flew	off	with	it.
‘Father	.	.	.’	Babur	could	not	stop	the	shivering	that	had	seized	his	body.	Down	in	the	ravine	as	the	men
cleared	the	chunks	of	mud	and	stone	he	glimpsed	what	looked	like	a	fragment	of	cloth.	His	father’s	robe.
A	little	while	ago	it	had	been	pale	blue.	Now	it	was	stained	purple	with	blood.	A	few	moments	more,	and
the	soldiers	pulled	out	his	father’s	body.	To	Babur	it	seemed	as	lifeless	and	broken	as	the	dove’s.	The
soldiers	looked	up	at	their	commander	high	above	them	for	a	sign	telling	them	what	to	do.
Wazir	Khan	gestured	to	them	to	carry	the	body	into	the	fortress.	Then	he	pulled	Babur	further	back	from
the	 edge	 and	 gently	 turned	 him	 from	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 destruction	 below.	 His	 face	 was	 grim	 but	 also
thoughtful	 as,	 for	 a	 moment,	 he	 looked	 down	 at	 Babur.	 Then	 he	 knelt	 and	 touched	 his	 forehead	 to	 the
ground.	‘All	hail	to	Babur	Mirza,	the	new	King	of	Ferghana.	May	your	father’s	soul	fly	like	a	bird	to	the
gates	of	Paradise.’
Babur	 stared	 at	 him,	 trying	 to	 take	 in	 what	 he	 had	 just	 said.	 His	 father	 –	 so	 full	 of	 life	 just	 moments
before	 –	 was	 dead.	 He	 would	 never	 hear	 his	 voice	 again	 or	 feel	 his	 warm	 hand	 on	 his	 head	 or	 be

embraced	 in	 his	 great	 bear-hug.	 He	 would	 never	 again	 accompany	 him	 when	 he	 went	 hunting	 in	 the
valleys	 of	 Ferghana,	 or	 sit	 close	 by	 him	 beside	 the	 campfire	 at	 night,	 listening	 as	 his	 men’s	 singing
mingled	 with	 the	 rising	 wind.	 He	 began	 to	 cry,	 silently	 at	 first,	 then	 aloud,	 convulsed	 by	 great	 sobs
welling	up	from	the	pit	of	his	stomach.
As	he	wept,	doubt	and	uncertainty,	as	well	as	grief,	engulfed	him.	He	was	king	now	.	.	.	Would	he	live
up	 to	 his	 father’s	 hopes	 and	 his	 glorious	 ancestry?	 For	 some	 reason	 a	 leaner,	 older	 face	 with	 slanting
cheekbones	and	cold,	determined	eyes	‘like	candles	without	brilliance’	replaced	his	father’s	image	in	his
mind.	As	it	did	so,	he	seemed	to	hear	his	father’s	much-repeated	mantra:	‘Timur’s	blood	is	my	blood.’
His	own	lips	began	to	repeat	it,	softly	at	first	but	then	with	more	conviction.	He	would	make	both	Timur
and	 his	 father	 proud.	 Pulling	 himself	 to	 his	 full	 height	 and	 wiping	 his	 tear-stained,	 dirty	 face	 with	 his
sleeve,	he	turned.	‘I	must	be	the	one	to	tell	my	mother	what	has	happened.’

Exciting	 though	 he	 found	 Farida,	 his	 beautiful	 young	 wife,	 Qambar-Ali’s	 lovemaking	 had	 been	 more
perfunctory	than	usual.	The	vizier	was	preoccupied.	The	king’s	sudden	and	extraordinary	death	had	left
much	for	him	to	think	about	and	little	time	if	he	wished	to	act.	A	twelve-year-old	boy	as	king?	Possibly
.	.	.	but,	then	again,	possibly	not.	Splashing	water	hurriedly	over	his	groin	and	pulling	his	navy	brocade
robes	back	round	him,	the	vizier	hurried	from	Farida’s	chamber	without	a	backward	glance.
As	 he	 passed	 through	 the	 fortress’s	 interior	 passageways,	 lit	 by	 flickering	 oil	 lamps,	 he	 caught	 the
sound	 of	 wailing	 coming	 from	 the	 royal	 harem.	 So,	 the	 official	 mourning	 had	 begun,	 led	 no	 doubt	 by
Babur’s	mother	and	grandmother,	formidable	women,	the	pair	of	them.	He	would	need	to	be	wary	of	them.
Neither	would	be	so	lost	to	grief	that	they	would	not	be	seeking	to	protect	and	promote	Babur’s	interests.
The	 vizier	 approached	 the	 royal	 audience	 chamber	 to	 which	 he	 had	 summoned	 the	 other	 officers	 of
state.	As	the	two	guards	opened	its	green,	leather-covered,	brass-studded	doors	to	allow	him	to	enter,	he
saw	that	three	were	already	there:	Yusuf,	the	stout	keeper	of	the	treasury,	the	golden	key	of	office	dangling
on	 its	 long	 chain	 round	 his	 jowly	 neck;	 Baqi	 Beg,	 the	 diminutive	 court	 astrologer,	 whose	 thin,	 restless
fingers	were	twisting	the	beads	of	a	rosary;	and	the	wiry,	beetle-browed	Baba	Qashqa,	comptroller	of	the
household.	Only	Wazir	Khan	was	absent.
The	 ill-matched	 trio	 were	 sitting	 cross-legged	 on	 the	 red,	 richly	 patterned	 carpet	 beneath	 the	 empty
throne.	Without	its	occupant	it	looked	a	small,	faded,	insignificant	thing,	the	gilt	a	little	tarnished	and	the
red	velvet,	gold-tasselled	cushions	shabby	with	use	and	age.
‘Well,’	said	Qambar-Ali,	looking	round	the	assembled	faces,	‘who	would	have	thought	it?’	He	waited,
wanting	to	gauge	their	views	before	he	said	more.
‘It	was	the	will	of	God.’	Baqi	Beg	broke	the	silence.
‘A	pity	you	did	not	foretell	what	would	happen.	For	once	the	stars	kept	their	secrets	veiled	from	you,’
Baba	Qashqa	said.
The	astrologer	flushed	angrily	at	the	comptroller’s	spiteful	words.	‘God	does	not	always	wish	a	man	to
know	his	own	destiny	–	especially	a	ruler	who	must	be	as	a	god	to	his	people	and	act	for	them	as	well	as
himself.’
‘I	meant	no	offence,	but	if	the	king	had	foreseen	his	own	death,	he	would	not	have	left	a	twelve-yearold	boy	as	his	heir,’	Baba	Qashqa	said	slowly,	and	shook	his	head.
Qambar-Ali’s	 pulse	 quickened.	 ‘Indeed.	 The	 kingdom	 needs	 a	 strong,	 seasoned	 ruler	 to	 survive.
Shaibani	Khan	and	his	Uzbek	mongrels	will	be	baying	at	our	gates	when	he	learns	the	news.	He	has	sworn

to	build	a	tower	from	the	bleeding,	eyeless	heads	of	all	the	princes	of	the	House	of	Timur.	A	puny	youth
won’t	keep	him	out	of	Ferghana	for	long.’
The	others	nodded,	all	wearing	melancholic	expressions	as	if	their	only	concern	was	the	well-being	of
Ferghana.
‘And	it	is	not	only	the	Uzbeks	we	must	fear.	Our	late	king	made	many	enemies	among	his	own	family	–
his	incursions	westwards	over	the	border	into	the	lands	of	his	brother,	the	King	of	Samarkand,	will	not
have	been	forgotten.’
‘Of	 course,	 the	 King	 of	 Samarkand	 is	 a	 great	 warrior,’	 Qambar-Ali	 said	 slowly.	 ‘So	 is	 the	 Khan	 of
Moghulistan.’	 His	 mind	 dwelled	 for	 a	 moment	 on	 the	 purple	 velvet	 bag	 plump	 with	 gold	 coins	 that	 the
khan	had	pressed	into	his	receptive	hand	during	his	last	visit	to	Ferghana.	He	remembered	his	words:	‘If
Ferghana	 should	 need	 me,	 only	 send	 me	 word	 and	 I	 will	 come.’	 The	 khan	 would	 surely	 reward	 him
generously	for	the	gift	of	a	throne.
‘There	is	also	the	ruler	of	Kabul	–	he,	too,	is	of	the	House	of	Timur,	a	cousin	of	our	late	king.’	Baba
Qashqa	looked	directly	into	the	vizier’s	eyes.	‘He	would	protect	Ferghana	.	.	.’
Qambar-Ali,	bowing	his	head	in	courteous	agreement,	resolved	instantly	that	this	very	night	he	would
send	a	messenger	northeast	through	the	mountains	to	the	Khan	of	Moghulistan	or	the	chance	would	be	lost.
‘We	must	be	cautious	and	not	hurry	in	case	we	stumble,’	he	said,	with	an	air	of	deep	thought.	‘We	need	to
take	 time	 to	 reflect	 and	 to	 consider	 the	 best	 interests	 of	 Prince	 Babur.	 The	 throne	 must	 be	 his	 when	 he
comes	of	age.	We	should	seek	a	regent	from	among	our	neighbouring	rulers	to	keep	Ferghana	safe	from	its
foes	 until	 then.’	 Not	 that	 Babur	 ever	 would	 mount	 the	 throne,	 he	 reflected	 inwardly.	 A	 little	 accident
would	not	be	long	in	happening.	It	would	be	so	simple	.	.	.
The	four	men	sat	up	as	Wazir	Khan	entered	the	chamber.	He	looked	tired	and	the	pink	scar	across	his
tanned	face	–	the	memento	of	a	sword	swipe	a	decade	earlier	that	had	also	robbed	him	of	the	sight	in	his
right	eye	–	stood	out	livid	and	raw	as	if	it	had	been	received	only	weeks	ago.	‘Gentlemen,	my	apologies.’
He	touched	his	hand	to	his	breast	and	bowed	to	Qambar-Ali	in	acknowledgement	of	the	vizier’s	position
as	the	chief	among	them.	‘I	have	posted	a	double	guard	around	the	fort	but	all	is	quiet.	The	king’s	body	is
being	prepared	and	everything	is	in	readiness	for	the	funeral	tomorrow.’
‘We	are	in	your	debt,	Wazir	Khan.	I	thank	you.’
‘You	 were	 speaking	 of	 appointing	 a	 regent	 for	 Ferghana?’	 Wazir	 Khan	 sat	 down	 beside	 Qambar-Ali
and	fixed	on	him	his	one	eye	with	an	unblinking	intensity	that	the	vizier	resented.
‘We	were.	Prince	Babur	is	too	young	to	bear	the	responsibility	of	government.	And	we	face	a	threat
from	those	dogs	of	Uzbeks.’	At	the	mention	of	the	Uzbeks,	the	vizier	simulated	spitting.
‘It	is	true	that	the	prince	is	young,	but	he	is	the	king’s	only	surviving	son	and	has	been	reared	since	his
earliest	days	to	reign.	It	is	his	destiny,	and	what	his	father	would	have	wished.	Babur	is	brave,	determined
and	learns	fast.	I	should	know.	At	the	king’s	request,	especially	when	it	became	clear	that	Babur	would	be
his	only	heir,	I	spent	much	time	instructing	him	in	swordplay	and	archery,	how	to	wield	a	spear	and	hurl	a
battleaxe.	 Babur	 is	 also	 astute	 beyond	 his	 years.	 Surely	 we	 five	 can	 guide	 him	 through	 the	 early	 days,’
Wazir	Khan	said	quietly.
‘My	dear	Wazir	Khan,	if	only	it	were	that	simple.’	The	vizier	smiled.	‘If	these	were	peaceful	times	your
plan	would	be	suitable,	but	the	Uzbeks’	ambitions	know	no	limits.	As	soon	as	they	hear	that	the	King	of
Ferghana	has	died	leaving	his	kingdom	to	a	mere	boy	they	will	be	upon	us,	ripping	out	our	entrails	and
raping	our	women.’
‘What	do	you	propose,	Vizier?’
‘We	should	ask	one	of	our	dead	king’s	relations	to	hold	the	throne	in	trust	until	Prince	Babur	comes	of
age.	The	question	is,	which	one	.	.	.’

‘I	 see.	 Well,	 I	 am	 just	 a	 simple	 soldier	 and	 still	 have	 much	 to	 do	 tonight.	 Your	 heads	 are	 wiser	 than
mine.	May	God	guide	you	to	the	right	decision	for	our	kingdom.’	Wazir	Khan	rose,	bowed,	and	walked
slowly	from	the	audience	chamber.	As	soon	as	he	was	outside	he	quickened	his	pace,	making	for	the	royal
harem	across	the	courtyard	on	the	far	side	of	the	fortress.

Babur	was	sitting	beside	his	mother,	Kutlugh	Nigar,	letting	her	find	comfort	by	running	her	fingers	through
his	long	dark	hair.	As,	haltingly,	he	had	broken	the	news	of	the	tragedy,	she	had	gone	so	pale	he	was	afraid
she	might	faint,	and	her	eyes	had	stared	at	him	blankly,	like	a	blind	woman’s.	As	the	reality	penetrated,
she	 had	 begun	 to	 rock	 back	 and	 forth	 and	 a	 thin,	 terrible	 wail	 of	 grief	 had	 risen	 from	 deep	 inside	 her,
gathering	 in	 intensity.	 Though	 the	 king	 had	 had	 concubines,	 she	 had	 been	 his	 only	 wife	 and	 the	 bond
between	them	strong.
He	 watched	 his	 grandmother,	 Esan	 Dawlat,	 pluck	 at	 the	 strings	 of	 a	 lute.	 The	 sad	 notes	 echoed	 and
soared	around	the	chamber	like	a	bird	seeking	sanctuary.	Her	white	hair,	thick	as	it	had	been	when	she
was	 still	 a	 girl,	 or	 so	 she	 liked	 to	 boast,	 hung	 in	 a	 plait	 over	 her	 shoulder.	 Her	 raisin	 eyes	 were	 redrimmed	but	she	had	mastered	herself.	After	all,	she	had	told	Babur,	determinedly	staunching	her	tears,	she
was	 a	 khanim,	 a	 direct	 descendant	 of	 Genghis	 Khan,	 the	 man	 they	 called	 the	 Oceanic	 Ruler	 who,	 two
hundred	years	before	Timur,	had	plundered	half	the	known	world.
As	Babur	watched	his	grandmother’s	face	he	recalled	her	constant	arguments	with	his	father	over	who
had	been	the	greater	warrior	–	Genghis	Khan	or	Timur.	Esan	Dawlat	had	never	ceased	recounting	how
Babur	had	been	a	large-headed	baby,	the	labour	long	and	agonising.	Throughout	it	she	had	comforted	her
daughter	with	predictions	that,	like	Genghis,	Babur	would	be	born	clutching	a	blood	clot	–	symbol	of	his
warrior	destiny	–	in	his	tiny	fist.	But	she	had	been	wrong.	Nevertheless	she	would	inevitably	continue,
‘May	he	still	be	a	great	ruler!’
As	if	she	sensed	his	scrutiny,	Esan	Dawlat	looked	across	at	Babur	and	he	saw	in	her	eyes	something	he
had	not	seen	there	before:	uncertainty.	She	put	the	lute	down.	‘Khanzada,	send	for	some	iced	sherbet,’	she
snapped,	at	her	sixteen-year-old	granddaughter.
Babur	 watched	 as	 his	 sister,	 tall	 and	 graceful,	 leaped	 to	 her	 feet	 to	 summon	 an	 attendant.	 As	 she
reached	the	entrance	of	the	room,	where	the	light	of	the	oil	lamps	was	dimmest,	she	almost	collided	with
Fatima,	head	attendant	of	the	harem.	Her	broad,	plain	face	was	streaked	with	tears.	‘Mistress,’	she	began,
before	 Khanzada	 had	 a	 chance	 to	 say	 anything	 about	 cooled	 sherbet,	 ‘mistress,	 Wazir	 Khan	 begs	 an
audience	with	your	august	mother	and	grandmother.’
‘Can’t	it	wait	until	morning?	They	are	grieving	and	need	to	rest.’
‘He	says	it	is	urgent.’	Fatima	put	out	her	hand	in	supplication,	as	if	pleading	his	cause.
Khanzada	 looked	 at	 her	 mother	 and	 grandmother,	 who	 exchanged	 a	 glance.	 Then	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 said,
‘We	will	see	him.	Babur,	leave	us,	please.’
‘But	why?	I	should	stay.’
‘Do	as	I	say.’	His	mother	sat	up.
‘No,’	said	Esan	Dawlat,	‘he	is	the	new	King	of	Ferghana.	Anything	Wazir	Khan	has	to	say	affects	him
more	than	any	of	us.	Let	him	stay.’
Kutlugh	Nigar	glanced	at	her	son’s	earnest	young	face,	the	determined	set	of	his	jaw,	and	nodded.	The
three	 women	 pulled	 their	 veils	 across	 the	 lower	 part	 of	 their	 faces	 and	 composed	 themselves,	 the	 old
woman	 standing	 in	 the	 middle,	 her	 daughter	 and	 granddaughter	 at	 either	 side.	 Babur	 rose	 and	 stepped

away	from	them.	At	his	grandmother’s	words,	something	within	him	had	changed.	He	was	apprehensive
but	also	excited.
Wazir	Khan	stooped	beneath	the	low	lintel	and	prostrated	himself	before	them.	‘Forgive	this	intrusion
at	so	late	an	hour,	Majesties.’
‘What	is	it?’	Above	her	veil,	Esan	Dawlat’s	shrewd	eyes	scanned	his	face.
‘It	concerns	His	Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan	glanced	for	a	second	at	Babur	in	the	shadows.	‘It	is	not	safe	for
him	here.	Even	as	we	speak,	men	are	plotting	for	their	own	gain	to	take	the	throne	from	him.’
‘You	 must	 speak	 more	 clearly.	 Who	 is	 plotting?’	 demanded	 Esan	 Dawlat.	 Her	 colour	 had	 risen	 and
rough	red	patches	stood	out	on	her	high	cheekbones.
‘	 We	 trust	 you,’	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 said,	 more	 gently.	 ‘You	 were	 the	 king’s	 most	 loyal	 commander.	 More
than	 that,	 your	 own	 mother	 suckled	 my	 husband	 as	 a	 baby,	 making	 you	 milk-brothers,	 bound	 by	 ties	 as
deep	as	blood.	In	the	days	ahead	I	look	to	you	to	honour	that	bond	.	.	.	to	protect	my	son	as	his	own	father
would	have	done	.	.	.	Please,	speak	frankly.	What	have	you	heard?’
‘Men	 of	 a	 dark	 temperament,	 impatient	 and	 seditious,	 scheme	 against	 you.	 The	 vizier	 and	 the	 other
members	of	the	royal	council	plan	to	offer	the	throne	to	another	–	they	think	I	caught	only	the	end	of	their
conversation	but,	concealed	outside,	I	heard	it	all.	They	claim	it	is	for	the	good	of	the	country,	that	your
son	is	too	young	to	reign	and	that	chaos	will	descend	on	Ferghana	if	they	do	not	appoint	a	regent	from
outside	until	he	comes	of	age.	But	they	have	all	been	bought	long	since	by	our	neighbouring	rulers.	Each
will	 promote	 his	 own	 paymaster.	 There	 will	 be	 civil	 strife,	 and	 all	 of	 their	 making.	 Because	 of	 their
greed,	 rivals	 will	 battle	 for	 the	 throne,	 sowing	 the	 seeds	 of	 blood	 feud	 after	 blood	 feud.	 And	 whoever
emerges	the	victor,	your	son	will	not	live	long.	He	will	always	be	a	threat	–	until	he	is	dead.’
‘That	is	impossible.	The	lives	of	Timurid	princes	are	inviolable	under	our	code	of	honour	.	.	.’	Kutlugh
Nigar’s	voice	faltered.
‘What	 must	 we	 do?’	 Esan	 Dawlat	 gripped	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 arm.	 Despite	 her	 skinny	 frame	 there	 was	 a
martial	force	about	her.	She	had	Genghis	Khan’s	spirit	as	well	as	his	blood.
‘Yes,	what	must	we	do?’	Babur	stepped	out	of	the	shadows.	His	face,	in	the	flickering	light	of	the	oil
lamps	burning	in	a	niche	in	the	wall,	was	set	and	determined.
‘We	must	be	quick.	We	must	be	decisive,’	Wazir	Khan	said	shortly.	‘Tomorrow,	after	His	Majesty	your
father’s	funeral,	we	must	immediately	declare	you	king,	here	in	the	royal	mosque	within	the	fortress.	Once
the	mullah	has	read	the	sermon	naming	you	in	the	sight	of	God	as	the	king,	anyone	who	challenges	you
will	be	a	traitor.	And	we	must	have	our	supporters	around	us	as	witnesses.	My	guards	are	loyal.	So,	too,
will	be	many	of	the	nobles	of	Ferghana	–	especially	if	you	promise	to	reward	their	loyalty.’
‘Fetch	me	paper,	ink	and	quill,’	Esan	Dawlat	requested	of	her	granddaughter.	‘We	will	not	spend	this
night	in	mourning,	lest	our	indolence	brings	even	greater	woes	upon	us.	I	know	those	we	can	rely	on	and
those	who	are	untrustworthy	and	deceitful.	People	think	my	old	eyes	and	ears	notice	nothing	but	I	see	what
goes	 on.	 I	 won’t	 trust	 a	 scribe	 to	 write	 letters	 such	 as	 these,	 I	 will	 do	 it	 myself.	 Wazir	 Khan,	 you	 will
make	sure	that	each	reaches	its	destination	safely.	If	anyone	dares	enquire	what	they	are,	tell	them	they	are
invitations	to	the	funeral	feast.	That	is	partly	true,	but	they	will	also	be	invitations	to	the	ceremony	in	the
mosque	 that	 will	 serve	 as	 Babur’s	 coronation.	 I	 am	 summoning	 every	 trustworthy	 chieftain	 who	 lives
within	half	a	day’s	hard	ride	here	to	Akhsi.	I	will	ask	them	to	make	their	way	secretly	and	silently	to	the
mosque	as	soon	as	the	funeral	feast	has	begun.	Babur,	sit	by	me	and	hold	an	oil	lamp	close.’
As	the	hours	of	night	drew	on	and	the	fortress	fell	silent	around	them,	Babur	looked	on	as	the	old	lady
wrote	 and	 wrote,	 pausing	 only	 to	 sharpen	 her	 quill	 and	 to	 call	 for	 more	 ink.	 It	 was	 extraordinary,	 he
thought,	how	much	she	knew	of	the	blood	rivalries	and	bitter	enmities	but	also	the	complex	marriage	links
and	deep	personal	loyalties	between	the	clans	that	went	back	almost	to	the	days	of	Genghis	Khan.	For	the

first	time	he	felt	grateful	to	her	for	all	the	hours	she	had	forced	him	to	spend	learning	who	among	the	tribal
chiefs	were	friends,	who	were	foes	and	–	most	important	of	all	–	why.	Watching	the	thin	set	line	of	her
mouth,	he	was	glad	that	she	was	his	ally,	not	his	enemy.
As	every	note	was	written	–	the	Turki	script	sprawling	over	the	paper	–	it	was	folded,	sealed	with	red
wax	 and	 handed	 to	 Wazir	 Khan	 to	 be	 entrusted	 to	 one	 of	 his	 men.	 Outside,	 the	 courtyard	 echoed	 to	 the
sound	of	departing	hoofbeats.	Only	when	the	call	to	prayer	rose	through	the	early-morning	mist	did	Esan
Dawlat	finally	lay	down	her	pen.

	
	
	

Chapter	2
First	Blood
	

Babur	 watched	 from	 his	 horse	 as	 the	 green-grey	 jade	 sarcophagus	 containing	 his	 father’s	 body	 was
borne	into	the	tomb	by	eight	of	Wazir	Khan’s	guards.	Thick	sheepskins	on	their	shoulders	cushioned	them
against	 the	 hardness	 of	 the	 stone	 but	 the	 coffin	 was	 a	 mighty	 weight.	 Sweat	 poured	 down	 their	 windtanned	 faces	 and	 one	 man	 stumbled,	 almost	 losing	 his	 hold.	 There	 was	 a	 gasp	 from	 the	 assembled
onlookers	–	it	would	be	a	dreadful	portent	if	the	sarcophagus	should	fall	to	the	earth.	Babur’s	stomach
tightened	and	he	glanced	at	the	vizier	a	few	feet	away,	but	Qambar-Ali’s	tortoise	face	was	impassive.
‘Careful,	 man,	 you	 carry	 our	 king.’	 At	 the	 bite	 in	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 voice,	 the	 guard	 steadied	 himself,
rebracing	 his	 shoulder	 to	 the	 burden,	 and	 the	 pall-bearers	 shuffled	 slowly	 into	 the	 passageway	 sloping
down	to	the	burial	chamber	in	the	heart	of	the	tomb.
Babur’s	father	had	long	ago	planned	his	mausoleum.	Babur	had	been	just	a	baby,	mewling	in	the	arms
of	 his	 big-breasted	 wet-nurse,	 when	 the	 king	 had	 summoned	 stonemasons	 and	 craftsmen	 from	 across
Ferghana	and	beyond.	Under	his	personal	direction	they	had	laboured	on	the	banks	of	the	Jaxartes	river	a
mile	and	a	half	or	so	west	of	the	fortress	of	Akhsi	to	create	a	smaller	version	of	the	great	Timur’s	resting
place	in	Samarkand.	Now	the	tiles	on	the	egg-shaped	dome,	bright	aquamarine	counterpointed	with	rich
cobalt	 blue,	 sparkled	 in	 the	 June	 sunlight.	 His	 father	 would	 have	 been	 proud,	 Babur	 thought,	 and	 at	 the
idea	a	half-smile	crossed	his	tense	face.
As	the	sarcophagus	disappeared	from	his	view,	a	great	wailing	rose	from	the	crowds	–	from	courtiers
and	chieftains	in	silken	robes	to	simple	herdsmen	who	stank	of	the	animals	they	tended.	Men	of	whatever
condition	 in	 life	 rent	 their	 robes	 and	 sprinkled	 their	 turbaned	 heads	 with	 earth	 in	 a	 ritual	 that	 predated
even	Genghis	Khan.	What	were	they	really	thinking?	How	many	were	genuinely	grieving	like	himself	?
Babur	 wondered.	 The	 chieftains	 had	 come	 in	 response	 to	 Esan	 Dawlat’s	 summons	 but,	 when	 the	 time
came,	could	he	rely	on	them?
‘Beware	 of	 those	 who	 seem	 to	 have	 no	 ambition	 –	 it	 is	 unnatural,’	 his	 father	 had	 always	 counselled
him.	Babur	could	not	help	glancing	at	Wazir	Khan	but	felt	instantly	ashamed.	With	his	father	dead,	after
his	mother	and	grandmother	the	tall,	straight-backed	soldier	he	had	known	all	his	life	was	the	person	he
trusted	 most	 in	 the	 world.	 But	 what	 about	 that	 grey-bearded,	 pockmarked	 chieftain	 over	 there	 who	 had
ridden	so	hard	through	the	night	from	his	mountain	fastness	that	his	robes	were	stained	with	his	own	and
his	horse’s	sweat?	Or	that	buck-toothed	one,	with	his	head	shaved	in	the	old	Mongol	fashion,	who	had
once	 been	 banished	 by	 his	 father	 for	 his	 scheming,	 deceit	 and	 greed	 and	 only	 recently	 forgiven?	 Esan
Dawlat	had	been	forced	to	take	risks	with	her	invitations:	she	had	hoped	to	summon	allies	but,	even	at	his
age,	Babur	knew	some	might	easily	turn	out	to	be	jackals.
But	 all	 of	 this	 must	 wait.	 First	 his	 father	 must	 be	 laid	 to	 rest.	 As	 Wazir	 Khan,	 head	 bowed,	 held	 his
jewelled	bridle,	Babur	dismounted.	Brushing	away	a	tear	he	took	a	deep	breath,	ready	to	lead	his	father’s
favourite	mullah	and	the	most	important	mourners	down	into	the	crypt	to	pay	their	final	respects.	For	a
fraction	 of	 a	 second	 he	 longed	 for	 the	 soft	 touch	 of	 his	 mother’s	 hand.	 But	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 was	 waiting
within	 the	 harem	 with	 his	 sister	 and	 grandmother,	 as	 was	 proper.	 Such	 occasions	 were	 not	 for	 women.

They	 had	 made	 their	 silent	 adieus	 from	 behind	 screens	 carved	 high	 in	 the	 walls	 as	 the	 cortège	 wound
down	out	of	the	fortress	and	on	towards	the	banks	of	the	swift-flowing	Jaxartes.
As	Babur	approached	the	mausoleum’s	dark	mouth,	he	saw	that	Qambar-Ali	was	already	ahead	of	him,
his	brown	robes	swirling	around	him	in	his	eagerness	to	be	first.	‘Vizier!’	Babur’s	young	voice	was	stern.
It	sounded	good.
A	faint	twitch	of	irritation	flickered	over	Qambar-Ali’s	face	as	he	paused	and	turned	aside.	‘Majesty.’
‘I	will	lead	the	mourners	for	my	father.	It	is	fitting.’	Babur	stepped	past,	making	sure	he	trod	hard	on
one	of	the	vizier’s	felt-booted	feet.	That	felt	good	too.
‘Of	course,	Majesty.’
Babur	gestured	courteously	to	the	mullah	to	join	him.	Qambar-Ali	followed	them	down	the	low,	dark
passageway.	The	other	royal	council	members	came	next,	as	their	high	office	decreed	they	should.	Yusuf,
as	treasurer,	was	carrying	a	bowl	of	gleaming	gold	coins	to	be	laid	at	the	foot	of	the	sarcophagus.	Baba
Qashqa	was	bearing	the	huge	red	leatherbound	journal	in	which,	as	comptroller	of	the	royal	household,	he
had	recorded	the	minutiae	of	royal	expenditure.	This,	too,	would	be	left	in	the	tomb	to	show	that	the	king
had	gone	to	the	next	world	with	his	affairs	in	order.	Baqi	Beg	was	cradling	a	crystal	globe,	the	symbol	of
office	of	the	court	astrologer.	Later,	when	the	funeral	was	over,	he	was	thinking,	he	would	gaze	into	its
shining	depths	and	proclaim	in	a	voice	laced	with	sorrowful	regret	that	the	stars	would	not	accept	a	mere
boy	as	king.
Courtiers	 flattened	 themselves	 against	 the	 damp	 walls	 of	 the	 crypt	 while	 others	 jammed	 into	 the
passageway.	The	heavy	air	reeked	of	men’s	sweat.	Babur’s	arms	were	almost	pinned	to	his	sides	by	the
crush.	As	the	mullah	began	to	intone,	softly	at	first	but	voice	then	rising	and	soaring	around	the	chamber,
fear	prickled	along	Babur’s	spine.	He	was	in	a	confined	place.	What	if	an	enemy	should	choose	now	to
strike?	In	his	mind’s	eye	bright	red	blood	spurted	from	his	slit	throat	and	spilled	on	to	the	jade	casket	with
its	delicate	tracery	of	tulips	and	narcissi.	He	heard	himself	trying	to	scream	but	managing	only	a	bloodchoked,	bubbling	gasp.
Faintness	and	nausea	gripped	him.	Babur	closed	his	eyes,	struggling	to	master	himself.	Despite	his	lack
of	years	and	hairless	chin,	he	must	be	a	man.	In	a	few	hours,	if	he	played	his	part	courageously,	he	would
be	on	the	throne	of	Ferghana.	Timur’s	blood	is	your	blood.	Silently	he	repeated	once	more	the	words	his
father	 had	 spoken	 so	 often	 and	 with	 such	 pride.	 As	 they	 echoed	 around	 his	 brain	 images	 formed	 in	 his
mind	of	great	and	glorious	battles	fought	long	ago	and	of	even	greater	conquests	to	come.	Resolve	steeled
his	blood	–	together	with	an	anger	that	men	should	even	think	to	deny	him	what	was	his.
Babur	felt	for	the	jewelled	dagger	his	mother	had	pushed	into	his	purple	sash	before	he	had	set	out	and,
as	his	fingers	curled	around	the	hilt,	his	breathing	steadied.	He	looked	speculatively	around	him.	Wazir
Khan’s	 men	 were	 in	 the	 crypt.	 They	 would	 surely	 not	 allow	 an	 assassin	 to	 cut	 down	 their	 prince.	 Or
would	they?	Scanning	their	faces,	he	realised	how	little	he	knew	about	any	of	the	guards.	Until	yesterday
he	had	taken	their	allegiance	to	his	family	for	granted.	Today	all	that	had	changed.	His	grip	on	the	dagger
tightened.
He	 focused	 his	 attention	 back	 on	 the	 mullah	 who,	 in	 his	 deep,	 sonorous	 voice,	 was	 chanting:	 ‘May
Allah	be	merciful.	May	the	soul	of	our	king,	Umar-Shaikh,	even	now	be	in	the	gardens	of	Paradise.	Let	we
who	are	left	weep	pearl	drops	of	sadness	but	let	us	also	rejoice	that	our	king	is	drinking	a	pure	draught	of
the	 waters	 of	 perfect	 happiness.’	 He	 came	 to	 an	 end	 and,	 folding	 his	 hands,	 backed	 away	 from	 the
sarcophagus	up	the	passageway,	the	spectators	parting	with	difficulty	to	allow	him	through	to	the	outside.
Babur	closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment	and	bade	a	silent	farewell	to	the	father	he	had	loved.	Then,	holding
back	tears,	he	followed	the	mullah	to	emerge	blinking	into	the	sunlight.	A	whooshing	sound,	like	a	bird	in
flight,	 so	 close	 it	 almost	 grazed	 his	 left	 ear,	 startled	 him	 and	 he	 leaped	 backwards.	 Was	 someone	 out

hawking?	He	looked	around	to	see	who	would	dare	seek	such	sport	while	the	King	of	Ferghana	was	being
laid	in	his	tomb.	But	there	was	no	bright-eyed	bird	with	jewelled	collar	and	silken	tassels	dangling	from
its	claws	and	shreds	of	prey	in	its	curved	beak.	Instead	an	arrow,	long-shafted,	with	blue-black	feathers,
quivered	in	the	ground	at	Babur’s	feet.	A	few	inches	more	and	it	would	have	pierced	his	body.
Shouts	 of	 alarm	 rose	 from	 the	 crowd	 and	 people	 were	 running	 for	 cover	 behind	 bushes	 and	 trees,
staring	up	in	alarm	as	if	expecting	the	late-afternoon	skies	to	darken	with	a	shower	of	missiles.	Chieftains
were	yelling	for	their	horses	and	their	men	and	reaching	for	their	own	bows	and	quivers.	Almost	instantly
Wazir	Khan	was	by	Babur’s	side,	shielding	him	with	his	body	as	his	gaze	swept	the	landscape.	Out	on	the
plains	there	were	few	hiding-places	but	a	large	rock	or	patch	of	scrubby	bushes	would	be	enough	for	a
lone	 archer	 with	 skill	 in	 his	 hands	 and	 murder	 in	 his	 heart.	 With	 a	 curt	 motion	 of	 his	 gauntleted	 hand,
Wazir	Khan	despatched	a	detachment	of	mounted	guards	in	search	of	the	would-be	assassin.
‘You	must	return	to	the	palace	at	once,	Majesty.’
Babur	 was	 still	 staring	 at	 the	 arrow.	 ‘Look,’	 he	 stooped	 and	 wrenched	 it	 from	 the	 earth,	 ‘there’s
something	round	the	shaft.’	He	ripped	off	the	coarse	red	thread	that	was	securing	a	sliver	of	parchment
and	 stared	 at	 the	 writing	 on	 it.	 The	 language	 was	 his	 own	 tongue	 of	 Turki,	 but	 the	 words	 leaped	 and
danced	before	his	eyes	and	for	a	moment	he	struggled	to	take	in	their	meaning.
Wazir	Khan	took	the	paper	from	him	and	read	the	message	aloud:	‘“The	mighty	Shaibani	Khan,	lord	of
the	world,	presents	his	compliments.	He	wishes	it	to	be	known	that	before	three	full	moons	have	come
and	gone	he	will	take	possession	of	the	shit-hole	that	calls	itself	Ferghana	and	piss	on	its	throne.”	’
‘Bastard	of	an	Uzbek,’	the	soldier	said	contemptuously,	but	Babur	saw	anxiety	in	his	face.
‘What	 is	 it?’	 The	 court	 astrologer	 came	 hurrying	 over	 and	 twitched	 the	 paper	 from	 Wazir	 Khan’s
fingers.	Baqi	Beg	glanced	at	its	contents	and	Babur	heard	his	sharp	intake	of	breath.	The	little	man	began
to	rock	back	and	forth	on	the	balls	of	his	feet,	hands	clenched,	his	reedy	voice	rising	in	a	wail:	‘Shaibani
Khan	is	coming,	that	alachi,	that	killer	.	.	.	I	see	it	.	.	.	He	rides	a	black	horse	that	smashes	men’s	skulls	to
dust	beneath	its	hoofs.’	His	wail	turned	to	a	shriek:	‘Shaibani	Khan	is	coming!	Death	and	disaster	ride
behind	him!’
Qambar-Ali,	too,	appeared	by	Babur’s	side,	the	treasurer	and	the	comptroller	close	behind.	All	three
were	shaking	their	heads.	‘The	royal	council	must	meet	tonight	after	the	funeral	feast.	Shaibani	Khan	does
not	make	idle	threats,’	the	vizier	said.	Yusuf	and	Baba	Qashqa	nodded	vigorous	assent.	So,	too,	did	Baqi
Beg.
Wazir	 Khan	 made	 no	 such	 gesture	 of	 agreement.	 Instead	 he	 was	 staring	 at	 the	 vizier	 in	 a	 way	 that
Qambar-Ali	did	not	seem	to	relish.	‘Vizier,	perhaps	you	would	do	well	to	use	your	undoubted	authority	to
calm	the	people.	My	guards	are	at	your	disposal	should	you	require	them	to	restore	order.’
‘You	are	right,	Wazir	Khan,	I	thank	you.’	Qambar-Ali	inclined	his	turbaned	head	and	hurried	off,	the
other	 royal	 councillors	 in	 his	 wake.	 Babur	 could	 hear	 Baqi	 Beg	 still	 muttering	 about	 the	 apocalypse	 to
come	and	felt	a	surge	of	irritation.	Once	he	was	crowned	he	would	have	a	better	man	than	that	spineless
worm	as	his	astrologer.	It	was	a	mystery	why	his	father	had	put	up	with	him	–	indeed	why	he	had	ever
chosen	him.	Perhaps	Baqi	Beg’s	family	had	done	him	some	service	he	had	felt	he	must	reward.
Now	that	no	further	attack	seemed	imminent,	men	were	emerging	slightly	sheepishly	from	their	hidingplaces,	 dusting	 themselves	 down.	 As	 the	 name	 of	 Shaibani	 Khan	 passed	 from	 mouth	 to	 mouth,	 Babur
could	hear	some	beginning	to	lament	and	moan	as	if	they	thought	their	doom	already	sealed.	He	glanced
up	at	the	sky	to	find	it	suddenly	bloated	with	black	clouds	that	had	sailed	in	unnoticed	over	the	plains	and
across	the	sun.	Drops	of	rain	splashed	on	his	upturned	face.
‘Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan	shook	him	again,	so	roughly	this	time	that	he	thought	his	shoulder	would	jump
from	its	socket.	The	soldier	lowered	his	voice	to	an	urgent	whisper:	‘This	message	from	Shaibani	Khan.

How	can	it	possibly	be	him?	How	could	he	have	learned	of	your	father’s	death	so	soon	when	he	and	his
hordes	are	the	far	side	of	the	mountains?	No,	it	is	a	device,	probably	planned	by	that	traitor	Qambar-Ali.
Perhaps	he	hoped	to	kill	you.	At	the	very	least,	he	wished	to	strike	panic	into	the	hearts	of	the	people	so
that	they	will	less	readily	accept	a	youth	as	their	king.	But	we	must	not	be	deflected	from	our	plan.	Ride
for	the	fortress	–	stop	for	nothing	and	no	one.	As	soon	as	I	can,	I	will	follow.’
The	 urgency	 in	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 voice	 burned	 into	 Babur.	 He	 shouted	 for	 his	 horse	 and	 leaped	 into	 the
saddle.	 For	 a	 second	 Wazir	 Khan	 gripped	 his	 bridle.	 ‘Just	 a	 few	 hours	 more,	 Majesty,	 and	 all	 will	 be
well,’	he	said.	Then,	signalling	to	a	detachment	of	guards	to	escort	Babur,	he	slapped	the	horse’s	creamy
rump	and	it	shot	forward.
As	 he	 galloped	 over	 the	 tussocky	 grass	 and	 the	 rain	 fell	 more	 heavily,	 Babur	 glanced	 back	 over	 his
shoulder.	He	could	make	out	Qambar-Ali	moving	through	the	agitated	people,	arms	raised.	What	was	he
really	 trying	 to	 do?	 Calm	 them	 or	 spread	 panic?	 Every	 instinct	 told	 him	 Wazir	 Khan	 was	 right:	 the
malevolent	hand	that	had	guided	the	arrow	had	not	been	an	Uzbek	one.
Digging	 into	 the	 deep	 pocket	 of	 his	 quilted	 overtunic	 Babur	 found	 the	 arrow	 he	 had	 stuffed	 into	 it.
Taking	 his	 reins	 between	 his	 teeth	 for	 a	 moment,	 he	 pulled	 it	 out,	 snapped	 it	 in	 two	 and	 tossed	 it
contemptuously	to	the	ground.	The	pieces	landed	in	a	dark	mound	of	sheep	droppings.

‘How	 goes	 it	 with	 my	 son?’	 Kutlugh	 Nigar’s	 face	 was	 drawn,	 her	 eyes	 pink	 with	 crying.	 From	 deeper
within	the	harem,	Babur	caught	the	sound	of	muted	weeping.	All	the	women	were	observing	the	rituals	of
mourning	for	the	dead	king.	Their	gasps	of	sorrow	sounded	strangely	in	unison	as	if	no	woman	dared	to	be
first	to	stop.
‘It	goes	well.’	He	had	decided	not	to	tell	his	mother	about	the	arrow	–	at	least,	not	yet.	It	was	the	first
time	in	his	life	that	he	had	kept	something	from	her	but	the	knowledge	that	he	could	have	lost	his	life	might
frighten	her.
‘And	your	father.	He	is	at	peace?’
‘Yes,	Mother.	We	prayed	for	him	and	he	sleeps	in	Paradise.’
‘Then	it	is	time	to	look	to	the	living.’	She	clapped	her	hands	and	her	waiting	woman,	Fatima,	stepped
forward	 from	 the	 shadows.	 In	 her	 arms	 were	 what	 looked	 like	 robes	 of	 yellow	 silk	 embroidered	 with
flowers	in	gold	and	silver	thread	and	a	velvet	cap	of	the	same	yellow,	topped	with	a	nodding	peacock
feather.	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 took	 the	 garments	 from	 her,	 handling	 them	 reverently.	 ‘These	 are	 the	 coronation
clothes	of	the	kings	of	Ferghana.	Feel	them,	they	are	yours.’
Babur	reached	out	to	touch	the	gleaming	folds	and	felt	a	quiver	of	pride.	A	king’s	robes	–	his	robes.
The	silk	was	cool	beneath	his	fingertips.
His	reverie	was	broken	by	the	clatter	of	hoofs.	From	the	casement,	Babur	glanced	down	into	the	wet
courtyard.	Evening	was	already	approaching	and	torches	were	being	lit	in	readiness	for	nightfall.	He	saw
Wazir	 Khan	 and	 the	 mullah	 ride	 in,	 their	 horses	 snorting	 and	 steaming.	 Soon	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 mourners
would	return	to	the	fortress	and	it	would	be	time	to	enact	the	plan	that	would	give	him	the	right	to	wear
these	 robes.	 Babur	 looked	 at	 his	 mother.	 Her	 expression	 was	 anxious	 but	 her	 eyes	 were	 determined.
‘Quickly,’	Kutlugh	Nigar	said.	‘	We	have	little	time.	The	robes	will	be	too	large	for	you	but	we	must	do
the	 best	 we	 can.’	 With	 Fatima’s	 help	 she	 wrapped	 Babur	 in	 them,	 tying	 the	 sash	 tightly	 to	 hold	 the
voluminous	folds	together,	then	placed	the	cap	on	his	long	dark	hair.	‘See,	my	son?	At	this	moment	you	are
a	prince	but	by	the	time	the	moon	rises	you	will	be	a	king.’	She	held	up	a	mirror	of	burnished	bronze,	and

Babur	saw	the	shining	reflection	of	a	stern,	slightly	startled	young	face.
‘Khanzada!’	 his	 mother	 called.	 She	 had	 clearly	 given	 thought	 to	 how	 Babur’s	 introduction	 to	 the
trappings	of	kingship	should	be	managed.	His	sister	had	been	waiting	and	listening	in	the	corridor	for	her
mother’s	call.	Now	she	stepped	quickly	into	the	chamber.	She	was	carrying	a	long,	thin	object	wrapped	in
green	 velvet.	 Carefully	 she	 laid	 down	 her	 burden,	 threw	 back	 the	 velvet	 with	 a	 somewhat	 exaggerated
flourish	and	pulled	a	curved	sword	from	its	scabbard.
Kutlugh	 Nigar	 took	 it	 and	 held	 it	 out	 to	 Babur.	 ‘The	 sword	 of	 justice,	 the	 symbol	 of	 Ferghana	 –
“Alamgir”.’
He	recognised	the	hilt,	cunningly	ornamented	with	white	jade	to	resemble	an	eagle	and	studded	with
gems.	The	bird’s	spread	wings	formed	the	hand-hold	and	the	head,	with	its	glittering	ruby	eyes,	protruded
over	 the	 top	 of	 the	 hilt,	 glaring	 defiance	 at	 any	 would-be	 attacker.	 His	 father	 had	 shown	 it	 to	 Babur
several	 times	 but	 had	 never	 permitted	 him	 to	 hold	 it.	 ‘It	 feels	 good	 to	 have	 it	 in	 my	 hands	 for	 the	 first
time.’	He	gripped	the	hilt	and	made	a	few	tentative	passes	through	the	air.
‘It	was	one	of	your	father’s	greatest	treasures.	They	say	that	the	rubies	were	once	Timur’s	and	that	he
brought	 them	 back	 from	 Delhi.	 It	 is	 yours	 as	 Ferghana’s	 new	 king.’	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 knelt	 to	 fasten	 the
jewelled	scabbard	at	his	waist,	adjusting	the	steel	chain	on	which	it	hung.
‘Where’s	my	grandmother?’	There	was	no	sign	of	Esan	Dawlat	and	Babur	would	have	been	glad	of	her
strength	at	such	a	moment.	He	would	also	have	liked	her	to	see	him	–	to	tell	him	he	looked	every	inch	a
king.
‘She	is	praying.	She	says	she	will	greet	you	when	you	are	ruler	of	Ferghana.’
A	servant	entered	and	knelt.	‘Wazir	Khan	begs	leave	to	enter,	Mistress.’
Kutlugh	 Nigar	 nodded.	 She	 and	 Khanzada	 had	 barely	 pulled	 their	 gauze	 veils	 over	 the	 lower	 half	 of
their	 faces	 before	 he	 was	 in	 the	 room.	 Babur	 noticed	 that,	 for	 once,	 he	 did	 not	 prostrate	 himself	 –	 the
business	in	hand	was	too	urgent	for	such	niceties.	The	tall	soldier’s	gaze	swept	over	Babur	in	his	robes	of
state	and	he	nodded	his	approval.	‘Majesties,	the	mullah	is	ready	and	my	men	are	prepared.	But,	even	as
we	speak,	Qambar-Ali	is	preparing	to	address	the	mourners	at	the	funeral	feast.	He	will	tell	them	that	the
kingdom	is	in	peril	and	that	the	prince	is	too	young	to	rule.	He	will	urge	that	another	prince	of	the	House
of	Timur	be	appointed	regent.	Last	night	one	of	my	patrols	intercepted	a	treasonous	message	he	sent	to	the
Khan	of	Moghulistan,	offering	him	the	throne,	and	I	have	other	evidence	of	the	vizier’s	murderous	deceit.’
‘But	we	have	time?’	Kutlugh	Nigar	gripped	Wazir	Khan’s	arm	tightly	in	a	breach	of	the	harem	protocol.
‘We	have	time,	but	the	prince	must	come	with	me	now,	before	Qambar-Ali	suspects	what	we	are	about.
He	believes	that	the	prince	has	returned	to	the	harem	to	grieve	with	you.’	He	turned	to	Babur.	‘Majesty,
you	 must	 cover	 yourself.’	 He	 held	 out	 his	 dark,	 duststained	 riding	 cloak	 to	 Babur	 who	 hastily	 threw	 it
around	 himself,	 his	 mother’s	 deft	 fingers	 helping	 to	 fasten	 the	 metal	 clasps	 and	 pull	 the	 hood	 over	 the
coronation	cap	with	its	waving	plume.
Hand	on	his	sword,	Wazir	Khan	gestured	to	Babur	to	follow	him	out	into	the	corridor.	As	he	brushed
past	her,	Khanzada	touched	her	fingers	to	Babur’s	cheek.	His	sister’s	eyes	above	her	veil	were	wide	with
apprehension.
Babur	felt	a	mixture	of	exhilaration	and	nervousness.	His	life	depended	on	what	happened	this	evening.
The	vizier’s	guile	was	not	to	be	underestimated.	Wazir	Khan,	seeming	to	sense	his	anxiety,	stopped	for	a
second.	‘Courage,	Majesty,	all	will	be	well.’
‘Courage.’	Babur	repeated	the	word	to	himself	and	ran	his	fingers	over	the	hilt	of	his	sword.
They	 walked	 swiftly	 through	 dark	 corridors	 and	 up	 winding,	 sharp-edged	 stairs,	 the	 light	 from	 oil
lamps	in	niches	casting	grotesque	shadows.	The	mosque	was	in	the	most	ancient	part	of	the	fortress,	hewn
on	the	orders	of	Babur’s	ancestors	from	the	rock	of	the	cliff	behind.	The	solid	cave-like	chambers	would

last	 for	 ever	 –	 unlike	 the	 fragile	 mud-baked	 battlements	 that	 had	 collapsed	 and	 carried	 his	 father	 to
Paradise.
All	was	quiet	as	he	followed	Wazir	Khan	into	the	open	and	across	a	small	courtyard	to	the	entrance	to
the	mosque.	The	rain	had	stopped	and	the	moon	was	rising	between	the	clouds.	By	its	cool,	inconsistent
light	 Babur	 could	 make	 out	 six	 of	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 guards	 stationed	 outside.	 Silently	 they	 saluted	 their
commander.
Signing	 to	 Babur	 to	 wait,	 Wazir	 Khan	 stepped	 through	 the	 pointed	 archway	 with	 its	 verses	 from	 the
Koran	carved	above	it.	A	few	moments	later	he	reappeared.	‘Majesty,’	he	called	softly,	‘you	may	enter.’
Babur	 peeled	 off	 his	 cloak	 and	 stepped	 inside.	 Torches	 burned	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 mihrab	 facing
towards	 Mecca	 where	 the	 mullah	 was	 already	 quietly	 at	 prayer.	 In	 the	 shadows	 Babur	 counted	 the
kneeling	 forms	 of	 some	 twenty	 or	 so	 chieftains,	 every	 man	 prepared,	 for	 reasons	 of	 blood	 loyalty	 and
tribal	allegiance,	to	swear	fealty	to	him.
Conscious	of	eyes	upon	him,	judging	him,	Babur	felt	the	weight	of	the	past	–	all	those	earlier	kings	of
Ferghana	–	pressing	down	on	him	so	heavily	that	his	young	shoulders	seemed	to	ache,	tensing	as	if	under	a
great	burden.	Advancing	into	the	centre	of	the	mosque	to	the	space	outlined	in	black	stone	where	his	father
the	king	had	always	prayed	he	prostrated	himself,	touching	his	forehead	to	the	cool	floor.	As	outside	an
owl	 screeched	 across	 the	 star-lit	 sky,	 the	 mullah	 began	 to	 preach	 the	 khutba,	 the	 sermon	 that	 would
proclaim	Babur	King	of	Ferghana	before	God	and	the	world.

‘And	so	you	see,	Excellencies,	we	have	little	choice	in	the	matter.’	Qambar-Ali’s	expression	was	one	of
dignified	resignation.	‘Even	today,	at	the	funeral	of	His	Sacred	Majesty,	the	Uzbek	devil	Shaibani	Khan	–
may	he	rot	in	hell	–	dared	to	threaten	us.	We	are	but	a	small	kingdom.	Many	covetous	eyes	are	upon	us,
not	just	those	of	the	vile	Uzbeks.	We	need	a	strong,	experienced	man	from	among	our	neighbouring	rulers,
not	a	boy	of	tender	years	like	Prince	Babur,	to	govern	and	protect	the	realm.	Who	that	should	be	we	do	not
yet	know	.	.	.	Later	tonight	the	royal	council	will	meet	to	consider	the	matter.’
Qambar-Ali	gazed	down	at	the	flagstoned	floor,	listening	to	the	anxious	murmurings	from	the	chieftains
seated	cross-legged	on	cushions	at	the	low	wooden	tables	around	him.	It	was	a	pity	his	archer	had	failed
to	strike	Babur	down.
The	other	officers	of	state,	Yusuf,	Baba	Qashqa	and	Baqi	Beg,	also	watched	and	waited,	each	allowing
his	mind	to	dwell	pleasurably	on	a	future	when	his	candidate	would	be	regent	and	he	would	be	rewarded
accordingly.
‘No,	by	God!’	The	rough	voice	of	Ali-Dost,	a	chieftain	from	the	west	of	Ferghana,	broke	into	QambarAli’s	wishful	thinking.	Ali-Dost	slammed	his	fist	down	on	a	wooden	trestle	bearing	a	whole	roasted	lamb
stuffed	with	apricots.	His	hand	was	waving	the	greasybladed	dagger	with	which	he	had	been	hacking	off
lumps	of	meat.	‘It	is	true	that	the	prince	is	too	young	to	rule,	but	why	should	we	have	a	stranger?	I	am	of
the	House	of	Timur.	My	father	was	a	blood-cousin	to	our	dead	king.	I	am	a	proven	warrior	–	did	I	not	kill
twenty	Uzbeks	with	my	own	hands	last	winter	as	the	first	snows	fell	and	they	raided	our	flocks	.	.	.	?	I
have	as	much	right	as	any	man	to	the	regency.’	Face	dark	red	with	passion	and	smeared	with	lamb	fat,	he
glared	at	the	assembly.
‘Brothers,	please.’	Baqi	Beg	spread	his	hands	in	appeal	but	no	one	was	listening	to	him.
Ali-Dost	was	heaving	himself	to	his	feet,	his	men	clustering	round	him,	murmuring	like	angry	bees.	In	a
moment	chieftain	after	chieftain	was	rising,	each	roaring	his	own	candidature,	his	own	demands.	Ali-Dost

swung	 his	 great	 fist	 at	 a	 man	 he	 believed	 had	 insulted	 him	 and,	 as	 the	 man	 crumpled,	 put	 the	 tip	 of	 his
dagger	to	his	throat.	Tables	that,	just	a	few	minutes	earlier,	had	been	laden	with	dishes	of	buttered	rice,
meat	and	dried	fruits,	were	pushed	over	as	men	fought	to	get	at	one	another,	wrestling	among	the	cushions.
Qambar-Ali,	who	had	withdrawn	out	of	harm’s	way	to	the	far	end	of	the	hall,	was	not	dismayed.	They
were	such	children,	these	so-called	warriors	who	would	kill	for	a	sheep	–	or	even	just	a	woman.	This
wine-fuelled	brawl	would	soon	fizzle	out	and	only	bolster	his	case.	He	watched	one	grizzled	chief	take
another	by	the	throat	and	shake	him	like	a	rat	till	his	victim,	over-filled	with	lamb,	spewed	it	up	in	his
face.
‘Stop	in	the	name	of	the	King	of	Ferghana!’
Qambar-Ali	whirled	round.	Wazir	Khan	was	standing	in	the	great	doorway,	his	mail-clad	guards	at	his
heels.	 The	 vizier’s	 derisive	 smirk	 was	 short-lived	 as	 he	 was	 pushed	 to	 the	 floor	 by	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 men
rushing	past	to	take	up	positions	around	the	walls	of	the	large	chamber.
At	 first	 the	 noisy	 brawlers	 did	 not	 realise	 what	 was	 happening.	 Only	 when	 the	 guards	 clashed	 their
swords	 on	 their	 leather	 shields	 did	 the	 heaving,	 flailing,	 swearing	 mass	 of	 bodies	 pull	 apart	 and	 fall
silent.
‘Prepare	to	greet	your	new	king.’	Wazir	Khan’s	voice	was	stern.
‘Sadly,	it	is	Allah’s	will	that,	for	the	moment,	we	have	no	king,’	the	vizier	said,	hauling	himself	up	from
the	ground	and	flicking	dust	from	his	robes.
Wazir	Khan	seized	Qambar-Ali’s	thin	shoulder.	‘We	have.	The	khutba	has	been	read	in	the	mosque.	All
of	you,	on	your	faces,	now.’	The	men,	fuddled	with	drink,	gazed	stupidly	at	him.	His	guards	began	moving
among	them,	pushing	them	to	their	knees	and	striking	those	who	resisted	with	the	flat	of	their	swords.
‘All	 hail,	 Babur	 Mirza,	 rightful	 King	 of	 Ferghana,’	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 voice	 rang	 out,	 and	 he	 prostrated
himself	 as	 Babur,	 in	 his	 oversized	 yellow	 robes	 and	 tall,	 velvet	 cap,	 slowly	 entered	 the	 room.	 The
chieftains	who	had	endorsed	his	kingship	towered	behind	him,	eyes	watchful,	hands	on	their	swords	in
case	of	trouble.
Babur	doubted	they	felt	any	special	allegiance	to	him.	They	had	simply	taken	a	gamble.	But	now	they
would	want	to	make	sure	they	had	backed	the	winning	side	and	could	claim	their	reward.
To	 Babur	 the	 scene	 seemed	 almost	 comical	 as	 he	 surveyed	 the	 chaos	 –	 heavy-breathing	 men	 lying
among	strewn	meat,	cushions	and	rice,	their	dogs	snuffling	and	snarling	as	they	fought	over	the	unexpected
feast	that	had	come	their	way.	Qambar-Ali’s	expression	was	no	more	friendly	than	those	of	the	drooling
hounds	as,	slowly,	he	knelt	before	Babur	and	touched	his	forehead	to	the	floor.
‘Vizier,	all	of	you,	you	may	rise.’	As	Babur	gave	his	first	order	an	almost	visceral	thrill	went	through
him.
Qambar-Ali	scrambled	up,	features	clearly	betraying	a	futile	attempt	to	master	his	consternation.	‘We,
the	members	of	your	council,	are	at	your	command,	Majesty.’
‘Then	how	do	you	explain	this	–	your	letter	of	invitation	to	the	Khan	of	Moghulistan?’	Babur	flung	out
his	hand	and	Wazir	Khan	handed	him	a	leather	box.	Inside	was	a	scroll	which	Babur	extracted	and	held
out	to	the	vizier	who	did	not	even	bother	to	take	it.
‘It	was	for	the	good	of	the	country.’	The	vizier	was	breathing	rapidly	and	heavily.
‘It	was	for	your	own	good—’	Wazir	Khan	began,	but	Babur	gestured	to	him	to	be	quiet.	This	was	his
first	test	as	ruler	and	he	must	prove	himself	worthy	or	next	week,	next	month,	next	year,	but	inevitably	at
some	time,	there	would	be	other	plotters	seeking	to	strip	him	of	his	birthright.
Qambar-Ali’s	face	was	working	with	agitation	and	Babur	caught	the	sour	odours	of	sweat	and	fear.	But
he	 felt	 no	 pity	 for	 the	 man	 who	 had	 enjoyed	 such	 favour	 from	 his	 father,	 only	 anger	 and	 a	 desire	 for
revenge.

The	treasurer,	the	astrologer	and	the	comptroller	of	the	household	were	bunched	in	a	tight	little	gaggle,
eyes	and	mouths	round	with	dismay.	‘Take	them	away,’	Babur	ordered	the	guards.	‘I	will	deal	with	them
later.’	He	glanced	up	to	a	small	grille	set	high	in	the	wall	and	thought	he	detected	movement	behind	it.
This	 was	 where	 the	 royal	 women	 sat	 and	 watched,	 modest	 and	 unseen,	 during	 feasts	 and	 festivals.	 He
knew	instinctively	who	was	there	–	his	mother	and	grandmother	were	watching	his	first	acts	as	king	and
urging	him	on.
It	was	strange	to	think	that	now	he	had	the	power	of	life	and	death.	Babur	had	seen	his	father	send	men
to	 their	 death	 many	 times.	 In	 the	 last	 year	 or	 two	 he	 had	 even	 witnessed	 the	 executions	 –	 beheading,
flaying,	ripping	apart	by	wild	stallions.	The	screams	and	stench	had	caught	in	his	throat	but	he	had	never
felt	it	was	wrong,	as	long	as	justice	was	done.
And	 he	 knew	 exactly	 what	 his	 mother	 and	 grandmother	 would	 expect	 of	 him	 now.	 His	 name	 meant
‘Tiger’	and	he	must	act	with	the	great	cat’s	deadly	speed.	‘You	plotted	treason	and	you	wished	me	dead,
did	you	not?’	he	said	coldly.	Qambar-Ali	did	not	meet	his	eyes.	Slowly	Babur	drew	his	sword	from	its
scabbard.	‘Guards!’	He	nodded	at	two	of	Wazir	Khan’s	men,	who	seized	the	vizier	and	pushed	him	to	the
ground,	pulling	his	arms	tightly	behind	him.	Then	they	pulled	his	turban	from	his	head	and	ripped	back	his
robes,	exposing	the	nape	of	his	neck.
‘Stretch	your	neck,	Vizier,	and	thank	the	celestial	stars	that	I	am	merciful	enough	to	give	you	a	quick
death	despite	your	treachery.’	Babur	pulled	himself	up	to	his	full	height	and	swung	the	sword	through	the
air	in	a	practice	stroke,	just	as	he	had	in	his	mother’s	chamber	a	few	hours	earlier.	God	give	me	strength
to	do	this,	he	was	praying.	Let	the	cut	be	clean.
The	vizier	twisted	in	the	soldiers’	grasp	and	there	was	venom	in	his	eyes.	Babur	hesitated	no	longer
and,	sweeping	the	sword	high,	brought	the	blade	down	hard.	It	sliced	through	the	vizier’s	thin,	gristly	neck
as	easily	as	if	it	had	been	a	ripe	melon.	The	head,	yellow	teeth	bared,	rolled	away	across	the	flagstones,
leaking	red	blood	like	liquid	rubies.
Babur	allowed	his	gaze	to	pass	slowly	over	the	awed	crowd.	‘I	may	be	young	but	I	am	of	the	blood	of
Timur	and	your	rightful	king.	Does	any	man	present	challenge	my	right	to	rule?’
There	 was	 complete	 silence.	 Then,	 slowly,	 chanting	 began:	 ‘Babur	 Mirza,	 Babur	 Mirza.’	 The	 sound
swelled	and	rolled	around	the	chamber	and	as	if	the	noise	was	not	enough,	men	beat	their	swords	on	their
round	hide	shields	or	pounded	their	fists	on	walls	and	tables	until	the	very	chamber	seemed	to	shake	with
their	passion.

	
	
	

Chapter	3
Timur’s	Ring
	

As	Babur	entered	the	chamber	his	chiefs	put	their	hands	to	their	breasts	and	bowed	their	heads.	Only
eighteen,	 Babur	 thought,	 and	 some,	 as	 his	 grandmother	 had	 warned	 him,	 of	 doubtful	 loyalty.	 His	 eyes
narrowed	as	he	gauged	each	man.	Only	a	month	ago,	while	his	father	was	still	alive,	his	thoughts	would
have	 been	 very	 different.	 He	 would	 have	 been	 wondering	 which	 of	 these	 warriors	 might	 invite	 him	 to
train	with	them	in	swordplay	or	to	gallop	with	them	in	a	game	of	polo	on	the	banks	of	the	Jaxartes.	Not
now.	His	childhood	was	over.	This	was	no	game	but	a	council	of	war.
Babur	 sat	 on	 his	 velvet-draped	 throne	 and	 signalled	 that	 the	 chiefs,	 too,	 might	 sit.	 He	 raised	 a	 hand.
‘Kasim,	the	letter.’
The	tall,	slim	man	in	dark	robes	who	had	entered	the	room	behind	him	stepped	forward	and,	bowing
low,	 handed	 him	 the	 letter	 that	 an	 exhausted	 messenger	 had	 delivered	 the	 day	 before.	 Babur’s	 knuckles
whitened	 as	 he	 gripped	 the	 document	 that	 had	 destroyed	 his	 peace	 of	 mind.	 Even	 now	 his	 mother	 was
weeping	in	her	apartments,	head	slumped	on	her	breast,	refusing	to	listen	to	words	of	comfort	from	his
sister	Khanzada	or	even	the	sharp	common	sense	of	her	own	mother,	Babur’s	grandmother,	Esan	Dawlat.
His	mother’s	collapse	had	shaken	him.	Kutlugh	Nigar	had	been	so	strong	after	his	father’s	accident	but
now	she	was	allowing	despair	to	overwhelm	her.
‘Vizier,	read	out	the	letter	so	that	every	man	present	can	hear	of	the	perfidy	of	my	uncle,	Ahmed,	King
of	Samarkand.’
Kasim	took	the	letter	again	and	slowly	unfolded	it.	He	had	been	a	good	choice	as	vizier,	Babur	thought.
A	 poor	 man	 of	 no	 family	 but	 considerable	 learning	 –	 not	 an	 ambitious	 intriguer	 like	 his	 predecessor,
Qambar-Ali,	whose	decaying	head	now	reposed	on	a	spike	over	the	fortress	gate.
Kasim	cleared	his	throat.	‘“May	the	manifold	blessings	of	God	be	upon	my	nephew	in	the	hour	of	his
grief.	God	has	seen	fit	to	spare	his	father,	my	brother,	from	the	burden	of	earthly	existence	and	to	send	his
soul	winging	to	the	gardens	of	Paradise.	It	is	we	who	are	left	who	have	cause	to	mourn,	and	to	remember
our	 duty	 to	 the	 living.	 The	 territory	 of	 Ferghana	 –	 I	 cannot	 in	 all	 conscience	 call	 such	 a	 small,
impoverished	pimple	a	‘kingdom’	–	is	alone	and	unprotected.	Enemies	of	the	House	of	Timur	are	circling.
My	brother’s	son,	a	mere	boy,	has	been	left	naked	and	vulnerable.	I	would	be	failing	in	the	love	I	bear	my
family	if	I	did	not	intervene	for	his	protection.	As	you	read	these	words,	beloved	nephew,	my	armies	are
already	marching	through	the	Turquoise	Gate	of	Samarkand.	I	will	annex	Ferghana	for	its	own	security.
Your	thanks	are	unnecessary.	I	grudge	neither	the	trouble	nor	the	expense,	and	little	Ferghana	will	at	least
make	a	pleasant	hunting	ground.	As	for	you,	dear	nephew,	soon	I	will	enfold	you	in	my	arms	and	you	will
again	know	a	father’s	love.	And	when	you	come	of	age,	I	will	find	you	a	small	fief	where	you	may	live	in
peace	and	content.”’
The	 warriors	 stirred	 uneasily,	 no	 man	 daring	 to	 catch	 another’s	 eye.	 Tambal,	 a	 distant	 cousin	 of
Babur’s,	 merely	 grunted	 while	 Ali	 Mazid	 Beg,	 a	 burly	 chieftain	 from	 Shahrukiyyah	 in	 the	 west	 of
Ferghana,	whose	lands	lay	directly	in	the	path	of	the	advancing	forces	of	Samarkand,	was	poking	about	in
his	 embroidered	 sheepskin	 jerkin	 as	 if	 suddenly	 afflicted	 with	 a	 plague	 of	 fleas.	 Babur	 sensed	 their

anxiety.	His	uncle	was	the	most	powerful	of	all	the	rulers	descended	from	Timur,	and	Samarkand,	on	the
great	Silk	Route	between	China	and	Persia,	surrounded	by	fertile	fruit	orchards	and	fields	of	wheat	and
cotton,	the	richest	of	all	the	Timurid	possessions.	Its	very	name	meant	Fat	City	while	the	Zarafshan	river,
which	ran	past	its	walls,	was	called	Gold	Bearing.
‘Now	you	understand	why	I	sent	my	swiftest	riders	to	summon	you	here.	We	must	plan	our	response	to
this	despicable	threat	to	Ferghana’s	independence.	Young	as	I	am,	I	am	your	rightful	king.	The	khutba	was
read	 in	 my	 name	 and	 you	 were	 present.	 I	 have	 dealt	 with	 the	 internal	 threat	 from	 Qambar-Ali	 and	 his
crew.	Now	I	call	on	you	to	stand	behind	me	against	our	external	enemies,	as	your	honour	says	you	must.’
Babur’s	voice	was	steady	and	clear,	his	words	resonating	pleasingly	off	the	stone	walls.	With	the	help	of
Wazir	Khan	he	had	rehearsed	what	he	would	say.
Silence.	Babur’s	optimism	wavered	and	he	felt	a	lurch	in	his	guts.	If	necessary	he	would	call	on	Wazir
Khan	to	speak:	his	cool	reasoning	would	carry	weight	with	the	chiefs,	though	Babur	would	prefer	to	be
seen	to	succeed	unaided	by	the	loyal	commander	of	his	bodyguard.	He	must	be	strong	.	.	.	He	persisted	in
as	deep	a	voice	as	his	years	would	allow:	‘We	must	act.	If	we	do	nothing	the	armies	of	Samarkand	will
be	outside	our	gates	before	the	next	full	moon.’
‘What	 does	 Your	 Majesty	 suggest?’	 Ali	 Mazid	 Beg	 raised	 his	 head	 and	 looked	 Babur	 straight	 in	 the
eye.	He	had	been	among	the	most	faithful	of	Babur’s	father’s	chieftains	and	Babur	felt	gratitude	for	the
support	he	read	in	the	man’s	almond-eyed	gaze.
‘The	king’s	forces	will	ride	eastward	from	Samarkand	along	the	Zarafshan	river.	We	must	circle	round
and	come	at	them	out	of	the	mountains	from	the	north.	They	will	not	be	expecting	such	an	attack.	We	will
show	my	uncle	that	Ferghana	is	strong	enough	to	defend	itself.’	Wazir	Khan	had	suggested	the	plan	to	him
and,	as	he	outlined	it,	Babur	knew	it	was	a	good	one.
Ali	Mazid	Beg	nodded	thoughtfully.	‘You	are	right,	Majesty.	They	will	not	look	for	us	to	come	over	the
northern	passes.’
‘	We	may	fend	off	your	uncle.	It	is	possible	–	at	least,	for	a	while.	But	what	will	we	do	when	Shaibani
Khan	comes	–	as	he	will?’	Tambal	asked	quietly.	Unlike	Ali	Mazid	Beg,	his	eyes	slid	away,	unwilling	to
engage	Babur’s.
Babur	sensed	the	unease	caused	by	Tambal’s	words.	The	Uzbek	clans	had	long	preyed	on	the	Timurid
kingdoms,	riding	out	from	their	settlements	on	the	northern	steppes	to	harry	and	raid.	But	recently,	under
their	new	leader,	Shaibani	Khan,	their	ambitions	had	been	growing.	They	were	looking	for	conquests	and
little	Ferghana	might	indeed	prove	tempting.	‘We	will	deal	with	the	Uzbek	and	his	scum,	too,	when	that
time	comes,’	Babur	said.
‘But	we	will	need	allies.	Neither	Ferghana	nor	any	of	the	kingdoms	of	the	House	of	Timur	can	stand
alone.	The	Uzbeks	will	pick	us	off	one	by	one,	like	a	fox	biting	the	heads	off	chickens,’	Tambal	continued.
‘Of	 course	 we	 need	 allies	 but	 let	 us	 seek	 them	 as	 free	 men,	 not	 like	 fearful	 slaves	 craving	 a	 good
master,’	Babur	insisted.
‘The	 slave	 may	 live	 longer	 than	 the	 free	 man.	 And	 when	 the	 time	 is	 right	 he	 can	 make	 his	 bid	 for
freedom.	If	we	accept	your	uncle’s	protection	we	can	piss	on	the	Uzbeks.	When	Shaibani’s	head	is	lopped
from	 his	 shoulders	 and	 stuffed	 with	 straw	 as	 an	 ornament	 for	 the	 harem,	 that	 will	 be	 the	 time	 for	 us	 to
think	once	more	of	Ferghana’s	independence.’
A	murmur	of	agreement	spread	round	the	chamber	and	now,	finally,	Tambal	looked	into	Babur’s	face.
His	expression	was	grave	but	the	slight	curve	of	his	lips	betrayed	satisfaction	that	his	words	had	struck
home.
Babur	suddenly	rose,	glad	of	the	little	step	beneath	his	throne	that	gave	his	youthful	frame	extra	height.
‘Enough!	We	will	turn	back	my	uncle’s	men	and	then,	from	a	position	of	strength,	I	–	not	you	–	will	decide

who	will	be	Ferghana’s	ally.’
In	 turn	 the	 chieftains	 leaped	 to	 their	 feet	 –	 it	 was	 unthinkable	 to	 remain	 seated	 once	 their	 king	 was
standing,	whatever	thoughts	they	might	be	harbouring.	Even	a	warrior	strong	enough	to	rip	off	another’s
arm	was	steeped	in	court	etiquette.
‘We	ride	in	four	days’	time.	I	order	you	to	be	here	with	all	your	men.	Tell	them	to	be	ready	for	battle.’
Instinctively,	Babur	turned	and	strode	from	the	chamber	followed	by	his	vizier	and	Wazir	Khan.
‘You	did	well,	Majesty,	to	allow	no	further	debate,’	Wazir	Khan	said,	as	soon	as	the	door	had	closed
behind	them.
‘I	 don’t	 know.	 We’ll	 have	 to	 wait	 four	 days	 to	 see	 who	 answers	 my	 call.	 Perhaps	 some	 of	 them	 are
already	sending	messengers	to	my	uncle	in	Samarkand.	He	can	give	them	richer	rewards	than	I.’	Babur
felt	weary	and	his	head	ached.
‘They	 will	 come,	 Majesty.’	 Kasim’s	 quiet	 voice	 surprised	 Babur.	 The	 vizier	 seldom	 spoke	 unless
spoken	to	first.	‘The	khutba	was	read	in	your	name	just	four	weeks	ago	–	it	would	dishonour	your	chiefs
among	their	people	to	fail	you	so	soon	and	without	allowing	you	to	prove	yourself	in	battle.	And	now,
Majesty,	if	you	have	no	orders	for	me,	I	will	return	to	my	duties.’	He	hurried	off	down	the	passageway.
‘I	hope	he’s	right,’	Babur	muttered,	and	then,	in	a	sudden,	furious	gesture,	kicked	the	wall	with	his	foot,
not	 once	 but	 twice,	 to	 release	 his	 pent-up	 emotions.	 When	 he	 saw	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 surprise	 he	 allowed
himself	a	brief	smile	and,	for	a	moment,	the	blackness	lifted	from	him.

As	Babur	approached	the	women’s	quarters,	servants	rushed	ahead	to	announce	the	king’s	approach.	How
different	it	was	from	the	days	when,	as	a	carefree	boy,	he	had	run	down	these	corridors	and	burst	in	on	his
mother	 causing	 her	 to	 scold,	 then	 caress	 him.	 Now	 there	 was	 so	 much	 ceremony.	 As	 he	 entered	 the
honeycomb	of	rooms	he	caught	the	flash	of	a	dark	eye	and	the	gleam	of	a	golden	bangle	on	smooth,	slender
ankles,	and	breathed	in	the	musky	scent	of	sandalwood.	He	had	not	yet	been	with	a	woman	but,	young	as
he	 still	 was,	 the	 women	 were	 already	 competing	 to	 catch	 his	 eye	 –	 even	 Farida,	 the	 young	 widow	 of
Qambar-Ali,	taken	into	the	harem	by	his	mother	out	of	compassion.	Though	she	was	still	in	mourning,	he
had	seen	her	watching	him.	And	others	had	put	themselves	in	his	path,	their	eyes	bold	and	inviting.
His	mother	was	lying	where	he	had	left	her,	but	at	least	she	was	sleeping	now.	His	sister	Khanzada	was
sitting	hunched	up,	knees	under	her	chin,	in	a	corner	of	the	room	and	playing	idly	with	her	pet	mongoose,
pulling	gently	with	her	hennaed	hands	on	the	golden	chain	attached	to	the	turquoise-studded	collar	around
its	neck.	At	the	sight	of	her	brother	she	jumped	up.	‘Well?’	she	asked	eagerly,	but	in	a	low	voice	so	she
did	not	wake	Kutlugh	Nigar.
‘We	will	see.	I’ve	given	orders	to	march	in	four	days.	How’s	mother?’
Khanzada	 frowned.	 ‘She	 won’t	 listen	 to	 reason.	 She’s	 convinced	 our	 uncle	 will	 seize	 the	 throne	 and
murder	 you.	 She	 once	 heard	 him	 boast	 that	 Ferghana	 would	 make	 a	 nice	 addition	 to	 his	 kingdom	 of
Samarkand.	She	says	he	has	always	regarded	us	both	acquisitively	and	with	contempt.	That’s	why	Father
used	sometimes	to	raid	his	borders	–	from	pride,	to	show	he	wasn’t	afraid.’
‘Well	 I’m	 not	 afraid	 either.	 If	 we	 don’t	 respond	 to	 this	 threat	 we’ll	 lose	 face	 among	 all	 of	 Timur’s
descendants.	I	would	rather	die	in	battle	than	give	way.’	Babur’s	voice	shook	with	a	passion	that	startled
him.	Glancing	round	he	saw	his	mother	had	woken.	She	must	have	heard	what	he	had	said.	Though	her
eyes	were	still	red	her	handsome	face	was	alight	with	pride.	‘My	son,’	she	said	softly,	and	held	out	her
hand.	‘My	youthful	warrior.’

The	stars	had	never	seemed	so	bright,	Babur	thought,	staring	up	from	the	battlements	into	the	heavens,	or
so	numerous.	The	air	felt	cold	and	pure,	and	as	he	breathed	it	deep	into	his	lungs	he	could	almost	taste	the
approaching	winter	when	the	rivers	would	freeze	and	wolves	would	come	howling	from	the	mountains	to
haunt	the	villages	and	prey	on	the	herdsmen’s	fat-tailed	sheep.
In	just	a	few	hours	he	would	be	riding	on	his	first	campaign.	His	father’s	eagle-hilted	sword,	Alamgir,
hung	from	his	belt	but	his	father’s	armour	was	still	too	wide	for	him.	Wazir	Khan	had	found	him	chainmail,	 a	 jewelled	 breastplate	 and	 a	 plumed	 helmet	 from	 the	 royal	 armoury,	 which	 did	 not	 fit	 too	 badly.
Which	Timurid	prince	had	they	once	belonged	to,	he	wondered,	running	his	fingers	over	the	gems,	as	cold
and	brilliant	as	the	stars	above	him,	and	what	had	been	his	fate?
A	 soft	 whinny	 came	 from	 the	 stables	 below.	 Wazir	 Khan	 had	 told	 him	 that	 horses	 always	 sensed	 a
coming	 battle.	 Beyond	 the	 fortress	 walls,	 Babur	 could	 see	 the	 red	 glow	 of	 charcoal	 already	 starting	 to
burn	in	the	braziers	as	the	encampments	came	to	life.	Shadowy	figures	were	emerging	from	hide	tents	and
stamping	on	the	ground	to	drive	the	early-morning	cold	from	their	limbs.	Servants	were	scurrying	about
with	jugs	of	water	and	lighting	flares	of	cloth	dipped	in	pitch.
Nearly	 every	 one	 of	 his	 chiefs	 had	 come,	 Babur	 thought,	 with	 satisfaction.	 He	 would	 march	 with	 an
army	 of	 four	 thousand.	 Small,	 perhaps,	 compared	 with	 the	 might	 of	 Samarkand,	 but	 large	 enough	 to	 do
some	damage	and	make	a	point	–	maybe	enough	to	force	a	truce	and	agree	a	settlement.	He	should	have
paid	more	attention	to	his	father’s	lengthy,	excited	accounts	of	military	strategy.	Instead	he	would	have	to
rely	on	Wazir	Khan’s	advice	–	but	he	would	learn	quickly,	he	promised	himself.	He	had	to.
Dawn	was	breaking	now,	a	pale	orange	glow	rising	over	the	mountains	and	illuminating	their	jagged
outline.	 Suddenly	 Babur	 spotted	 a	 cluster	 of	 horsemen	 galloping	 hard	 along	 the	 valley	 –	 latecomers,
perhaps.	Pleased	by	their	sense	of	urgency,	he	ran	down	the	steep	stone	steps	from	the	battlements	to	the
courtyard	to	greet	them.
Steam	was	rising	from	the	horses’	heaving	flanks	as	the	riders	surged	up	the	castle	ramp.	Their	leader
shouted	for	the	metalstudded	gates	to	be	opened	and	for	permission	to	enter.
‘Halt!’	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 voice	 rang	 out.	 Hurrying	 to	 his	 side,	 Babur	 saw	 what	 the	 commander	 of	 his
bodyguard	was	staring	at	through	the	grille	of	the	gate.	The	crouching	tiger	on	their	green	silken	banners
proclaimed	the	new	arrivals	subjects	not	of	Ferghana	but	of	Samarkand.
The	 leading	 horseman’s	 mount	 reared	 as	 he	 pulled	 hard	 on	 the	 reins.	 ‘We	 bring	 news,’	 he	 shouted
hoarsely.	‘Our	king	is	dead.’
‘Majesty,	stay	back.	I	will	deal	with	this.	It	may	be	a	trick,’	Wazir	Khan	cautioned,	then	signalled	his
guards	 to	 stand	 aside	 and	 open	 the	 gates	 to	 allow	 the	 riders	 into	 the	 courtyard.	 Hand	 on	 the	 hilt	 of	 his
sword,	he	strode	forward	to	confront	them.	‘Identify	yourselves.’
‘I	am	Baisanghar,	a	captain	of	the	King	of	Samarkand’s	bodyguard.	These	are	my	men.’
Baisanghar’s	 face	 was	 streaked	 with	 sweat	 and	 dust	 but	 what	 struck	 Babur	 most	 was	 his	 utter
exhaustion	beneath	the	grime.	This	was	no	ruse.	Disregarding	Wazir	Khan’s	caution,	he	stepped	forward.
‘I	am	Babur,	King	of	Ferghana.	What	has	happened	to	my	uncle?’
‘The	king	was	on	his	way	to	Your	Gracious	Majesty	in	Ferghana	to	offer	you	his	.	.	.	protection.	He	and
his	 forces	 had	 camped	 overnight	 by	 a	 fast-flowing	 river	 and	 were	 building	 a	 temporary	 bridge	 over	 it
when	Uzbeks	ambushed	us	not	two	hours	after	dawn.	In	the	surprise	and	confusion	all	was	lost	–	the	war
elephants,	 camels	 and	 our	 baggage	 animals	 ran	 off	 in	 terror,	 trampling	 anyone	 or	 anything	 that	 stood	 in
their	path.	Our	men	fought	bravely	but	many	were	killed.	Some	tried	to	escape	back	over	the	half-built

bridge	but	it	collapsed	under	them	and	they	were	swept	away.	The	waters	of	the	river	soon	ran	red	with
blood	–	Uzbek	as	well	as	ours,	it’s	true	–	but	we	were	overwhelmed.’
‘And	my	uncle?’
‘When	the	attack	began	he	was	in	his	scarlet	tent	on	the	riverbank.	He	managed	to	mount	his	horse	and
ride	against	the	enemy	but	an	arrow	struck	him	in	the	throat	and	he	fell	to	the	ground	where	he	lay,	his
heels	drumming	the	earth	in	his	agony.	We	managed	to	reach	him	and	drag	him	from	among	the	horses’
hoofs.	But	there	was	nothing	the	doctors	–	the	hakims	–	could	do	for	him.	They	could	not	staunch	the	loss
of	 blood.	 He	 was	 dead	 within	 the	 hour.	 As	 the	 news	 spread	 among	 our	 forces	 some	 of	 the	 chieftains,
fearing	what	was	to	come,	called	off	their	men	and	turned	for	their	home	villages.’	Baisanghar’s	voice
was	bitter	with	contempt.
‘And	why	have	you	come	here?’
‘It	was	your	uncle’s	dying	wish.	He	believed	that	God	was	punishing	him	for	coveting	Ferghana.	As	his
last	breath	bubbled	through	the	blood	in	his	throat	he	asked	me	to	seek	your	forgiveness	so	that	he	may
rest	in	tranquillity	in	Paradise.’
That	didn’t	sound	at	all	like	his	uncle,	Babur	reflected,	but	perhaps	the	proximity	of	death	changed	men.
‘What	 proof	 have	 you	 of	 what	 you	 say?’	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 one	 eye	 was	 still	 alive	 with	 suspicion,	 and
Babur	noticed	he	had	not	ordered	his	men	to	stand	down.	Even	now	three	had	their	bows	raised,	trained
on	Baisanghar.
‘Here	 is	 my	 proof.’	 Baisanghar	 thrust	 his	 hand	 deep	 inside	 his	 hide	 jerkin	 and	 pulled	 out	 a	 small,
stained	 pouch.	 Loosing	 the	 plaited	 thong	 around	 its	 neck	 he	 extracted	 a	 piece	 of	 brocade.	 Carefully,
reverently,	he	unrolled	it	to	reveal	what	lay	inside:	a	heavy,	blood-smeared	gold	ring.
Babur	gasped	as	Baisanghar	held	it	out.	‘See,’	his	voice	was	almost	a	whisper,	‘the	ring	of	Timur	the
Great.’	The	snarling	tiger	etched	into	the	yellow	metal	seemed	to	writhe	and	spit.

The	atmosphere	at	the	council	of	war	was	very	different	this	time.	As	Babur	entered,	flanked	by	his	vizier
and	Wazir	Khan,	the	chiefs	were	noisily	debating	the	astonishing	turn	of	events.
‘The	message	is	clear,	Majesty.’	Tambal’s	eyes	gleamed	with	excitement.	‘The	king	has	named	you	his
heir	–	he	had	no	sons.	Others	will	try	to	claim	it,	but	Samarkand	is	yours	if	we	move	quickly.’
Babur	could	not	resist	an	ironic	smile.	‘And	the	Uzbeks?	A	few	days	ago	you	were	afraid	of	them.	And
you	 were	 right	 –	 they	 have	 just	 butchered	 my	 uncle,	 ravaged	 his	 armies	 and	 looted	 his	 baggage	 train.
Suppose	they,	too,	now	have	their	eyes	on	Samarkand?’
‘But	 it’s	 almost	 autumn.	 The	 seasons	 are	 our	 friend.	 Every	 year	 it’s	 the	 same.	 As	 winter	 approaches
Shaibani	Khan	withdraws	north	to	his	lair	in	Turkestan	and	does	not	move	again	until	the	snows	melt.’
‘What	do	you	say,	Ali	Mazid	Beg?’	But	Babur	already	knew.	The	man’s	whole	body	exuded	ebullience
and	confidence	and	his	eyes	were	brilliant	at	the	thought	of	the	glories	and	booty	ahead.	Samarkand	was
rich	but,	more	than	that,	it	had	been	the	centre	of	Timur’s	empire,	the	glorious	place	every	Timurid	prince
and	 noble	 ached	 for.	 Babur	 felt	 the	 same	 longing.	 While	 still	 so	 young,	 fortune	 had	 handed	 him	 an
opportunity	that	might	never	come	again.	He	had	no	wish	for	a	long	life	and	a	peaceful	death	propped	on
silken	cushions	if	his	last	living	thoughts	were	to	be	of	missed	chances.	His	road	to	Paradise	must	not	be
paved	with	regrets.
Ali	Mazid	Beg	did	not	disappoint	him.	‘I	say	we	should	ride	quickly,	before	the	winter	comes.’
‘And	you,	Wazir	Khan,	what	is	your	view?’

Babur	 had	 had	 no	 time	 to	 discuss	 plans	 with	 him.	 Would	 he	 say	 something	 to	 quell	 the	 excitement
pumping	so	violently	through	him	that	his	body	was	almost	vibrating?	Wazir	Khan’s	single	eye	was	gazing
intently	at	him,	considering.	Here	it	comes,	Babur	thought,	the	words	of	cold	reason	to	slow	my	pulses.
He	will	tell	me	I	am	just	a	youth,	that	defending	my	kingdom	is	one	thing	but	conquests	are	another.	He
will	counsel	me	to	wait,	tell	me	prudence	must	be	allied	with	courage,	patience	with	ambition.
‘Tambal	is	right.	Having	tasted	blood,	Shaibani	and	his	Uzbeks	should	now	be	riding	north,	away	from
Ferghana	along	the	Jaxartes	river.	I	will	send	out	scouts	to	make	sure.	But	even	without	the	Uzbek	menace
our	armies	are	too	few	for	such	a	venture.	We	need	allies,	paid	men	–	mercenaries,	if	you	will.	We	must
persuade	the	mountain	tribes	to	ride	with	us.	If	we	pay	they	will	come,	and	if	they	come	we	may	–	God
willing	–	be	victorious.’
Babur	 gazed	 at	 Wazir	 Khan	 as	 if	 he	 had	 never	 before	 appreciated	 him	 properly.	 ‘You	 will	 be	 my
commander-in-chief.	Do	whatever	is	necessary.	We	ride	in	two	weeks.’
‘Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan	bowed	his	head.

Hoofbeats	pounded	the	cold	earth,	over	and	over	again,	so	that	their	rhythm	seemed	the	only	reality.	Babur
twined	 his	 fingers	 in	 his	 horse’s	 mane	 to	 steady	 himself	 as	 he	 swayed	 with	 fatigue.	 Since	 leaving	 his
fortress	at	Akhsi,	he	had	ridden	ahead	each	day	with	the	advance	guard,	leaving	the	heavily	laden	packbeasts	carrying	tents	and	cooking	equipment	to	follow	and	meet	up	with	them	at	nightfall.	Four	days	ago
his	 entire	 force	 had	 crossed	 from	 Ferghana	 into	 lands	 belonging	 to	 Samarkand	 but	 had	 encountered
nothing	more	threatening	than	a	few	herdsmen.
Babur	looked	up.	In	an	hour	the	sun	would	be	sinking	in	their	faces	but	before	then	their	three-hundredmile	journey	west	between	high	mountain	passes	and	across	foaming	rivers	should	be	over.	The	domes	of
the	city	of	Samarkand	itself	would	lie	before	them	like	an	offering.	Perhaps	even	tonight	he	would	occupy
Timur’s	capital.	Babur	indulged	himself	by	picturing	the	grateful	populace	thronging	round	him,	overcome
that	a	new	Timurid	king	had	come	to	save	them.
At	the	thought,	he	kicked	on	his	horse	once	more	and,	despite	its	fatigue,	the	animal	shot	forward	up	the
slope	 of	 a	 hill.	 There	 in	 the	 distance,	 across	 the	 shining	 waters	 of	 the	 Zarafshan	 river,	 Samarkand	 lay
silhouetted	against	a	vibrant	sky.	Babur	stared	as	if	mesmerised.	His	breath	caught	in	his	throat.	Perhaps,
until	this	moment,	he	had	not	quite	believed	that	Samarkand	really	existed.	Now	there	was	no	doubt.	This
was	no	fable,	no	haunt	of	phantoms,	but	a	place,	inhabited	by	men	of	flesh	and	blood,	that	he	had	come	to
claim	as	his	own.
Babur	let	out	a	whoop	but	his	cry	of	jubilation	died	on	his	lips.	To	the	south,	several	miles	from	the
city,	was	an	encampment	among	the	nearly	leafless	tress	of	Samarkand’s	fabled	orchards	that,	just	a	few
weeks	 earlier,	 would	 have	 dipped	 under	 their	 burden	 of	 fragrant	 apples	 and	 golden	 pomegranates.
Banners	 flew	 in	 the	 chill	 breeze	 and	 smoke	 spiralled	 from	 cooking	 fires.	 As	 he	 watched,	 Babur	 saw	 a
detachment	 of	 riders	 gallop	 into	 this	 camp,	 swerving	 expertly	 between	 the	 tents	 to	 be	 greeted	 by	 the
metallic	blare	of	trumpets.
So,	 despite	 all	 his	 haste,	 he	 was	 not	 the	 first	 would-be	 king	 to	 reach	 Samarkand.	 Someone	 had
forestalled	him.	Disappointment	sharp	as	physical	pain	skewered	him.
Wazir	Khan	was	beside	him,	cursing	vividly	as	he,	too,	stared	at	the	scene	ahead.	‘I	will	send	scouts,
Majesty.’
‘Is	it	Shaibani	Khan?’

‘I	don’t	think	so.	The	camp	isn’t	large	enough.	And	the	city	doesn’t	appear	to	be	under	attack	or	even
siege,	which	it	would	surely	be	if	Shaibani	Khan	were	here.’
‘Then	who?’
‘I	 don’t	 know.	 But	 it	 isn’t	 safe	 to	 go	 forward.	 We	 must	 retreat	 down	 this	 hill,	 make	 camp	 in	 its	 lee,
where	we	cannot	be	seen,	and	wait	for	our	main	force	to	catch	up	tomorrow.’
Wazir	Khan	read	the	bleak	disappointment	on	Babur’s	face.	‘This	is	Qolba	Hill,	a	place	of	dreams	and
hopes.	Five	years	ago	I	was	with	your	father,	here,	on	this	very	spot,	with	the	armies	of	Ferghana	behind
us.	Like	you,	Majesty,	he	gazed	on	Samarkand	and	what	he	saw	made	him	catch	his	breath	with	ambition
and	desire.’
‘What	happened?’
‘The	king,	your	uncle,	was	away	fighting	rebellious	tribes	to	the	west.	It	was	the	perfect	time	to	attack,
but	God	was	not	with	us.	That	very	night	your	father,	who	had	ridden	so	hard	that	one	of	his	best	horses
collapsed	 under	 him,	 was	 stricken	 by	 such	 a	 deep	 fever	 that	 the	 doctors	 feared	 for	 his	 life.	 We	 had	 no
choice	but	to	turn	back.	Your	father	took	it	hard	but	it	was	his	fate.’
‘Why	did	my	uncle	and	my	father	hate	each	other	so	much?	They	were	brothers.’
‘Only	 half-brothers,	 born	 of	 different	 women,	 and	 rivals	 from	 the	 moment	 they	 were	 old	 enough	 to
realise	that	each	coveted	the	same	thing	–	Timur’s	city.	Your	uncle	Ahmed	was	the	older	by	four	years.	He
seized	Samarkand	and	spent	the	rest	of	his	life	taunting	your	father.	Yet	your	father	had	something	he	did
not.	In	spite	of	all	his	women	and	all	the	potions	he	swallowed	or	rubbed	into	his	groin,	your	uncle	could
not	 father	 a	 son	 to	 succeed	 him.	 And	 that,	 more	 than	 anything,	 he	 could	 not	 forgive.	 That	 was	 why	 he
planned	to	take	Ferghana	from	you	and	leave	you	nothing	–	perhaps	not	even	your	life.’
In	 his	 mind’s	 eye	 Babur	 saw	 his	 distraught	 mother	 sobbing	 in	 anguish	 at	 the	 news	 of	 his	 uncle’s
advance.	She	had	understood	the	depths	of	his	enmity.	But	in	his	dying	moments	his	uncle	had	relented	and
sent	Babur	Timur’s	ring.	Surely	that	was	a	sign?	He	was	meant	to	rule	Samarkand	and	not,	like	his	father,
live	out	a	life	blighted	by	disappointment.
‘Come,	Majesty.’
Babur	 fought	 the	 impulse	 to	 gallop	 wildly	 on	 and	 confront	 these	 interlopers	 who	 thought	 they	 could
snatch	away	his	dreams.	Sadly	he	turned	his	horse	and	followed	Wazir	Khan	slowly	back	down	through
the	tussocky	grass	of	Qolba	Hill.
Soon	 the	 tents	 were	 pitched	 but	 there	 was	 no	 hot	 food	 in	 case	 smoke	 rising	 from	 the	 cooking	 fires
alerted	 those	 on	 the	 plains	 beyond.	 Despite	 their	 weight,	 Babur	 shivered	 beneath	 layers	 of	 pungentsmelling	sheepskins	as	the	temperature	dropped.	Finally	he	drifted	off	to	sleep	only	to	be	shaken	awake
what	seemed	like	just	a	few	minutes	later.	‘Majesty,	I	have	news.’	Wazir	Khan	was	kneeling	at	his	side.
His	face	was	relaxed.	There	was	even	a	twist	of	a	smile.	‘It	seems	we	have	interrupted	an	affair	of	the
heart.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Five	days	ago	your	cousin	Mahmud,	son	of	the	King	of	Kunduz,	arrived	here.	His	goal	was	not	to	take
the	city	but	a	girl.	With	Samarkand	in	confusion	he	planned	to	steal	into	the	city	and	find	her.	She	is	the
daughter	of	the	grand	vizier.’
‘What	stopped	him?’	Babur	could	hardly	believe	his	ears.	The	last	time	he	had	seen	Mahmud,	the	son
of	his	mother’s	favourite	sister	and	three	years	older	than	him,	he	had	been	a	clumsy,	cheerful	 boy	 with
angry	 spots	 on	 his	 hairless	 chin	 and	 a	 passion	 for	 pranks	 that	 often	 got	 him	 into	 trouble.	 Babur	 had
followed	worshipfully	where	he	led.	The	idea	of	a	lovelorn	Mahmud	sighing	his	heart	out	for	a	girl	was
ridiculous.
Wazir	Khan’s	face	assumed	its	usual	grave	expression.	‘Your	cousin	found	the	city	gates	barred.	The

grand	vizier	is	claiming	the	throne	of	Samarkand	–	the	city	and	all	its	territories.’
‘What	gives	him	that	right?’
‘Nothing.	He	has	no	blood	descent	from	Timur.	But	he	is	powerful.	He	controls	the	treasury	and	can
bribe	anyone	he	wishes.’
‘But	when	he	learns	that	I,	the	former	king’s	nephew,	am	here	he	must	give	way.	My	right	is	greater	than
his,	however	many	fistfuls	of	golden	coins	he	can	shower	on	those	around	him.’
The	youthful	indignation	in	Babur’s	voice	made	Wazir	Khan	smile	again.	‘He	knows	you	are	coming
but	has	declared	he	will	not	yield	the	throne	to	a	raw	stripling.	Neither	will	he	give	his	daughter	to	Prince
Mahmud.	He	plans	a	great	match	for	her	with	another	of	your	cousins	–	the	son	of	the	King	of	Kabul.’
‘We’ll	see	about	that.’	Babur	jumped	to	his	feet,	so	that	the	sheepskins	tumbled	around	him.	‘Bring	my
horse.	I	will	ride	to	my	cousin’s	camp.’
Dawn	was	rising	as	Babur,	wrapped	in	a	thick	cloak,	galloped	towards	his	cousin’s	encampment,	his
escort	close	around.
‘Halt.’	A	soldier’s	voice	came	gruffly	out	of	the	pale	grey	light.	‘Declare	yourself.’
‘Babur,	King	of	Ferghana,	who	wishes	to	greet	his	cousin,	Prince	Mahmud	of	Kunduz.’
A	silence,	then	a	murmuring,	then	a	blazing	torch	held	high,	casting	haloes	of	light.	Babur	shaded	his
eyes	 as	 soldiers	 encircled	 his	 small	 party.	 Then	 he	 heard	 a	 voice	 he	 recognised,	 deeper	 than	 he
remembered	but	still	brimming	with	good	humour.	‘You	are	welcome,	cousin.’	Mahmud,	unruly	black	hair
flowing	over	his	shoulders	and	a	falcon	on	his	gloved	wrist,	strode	towards	him	and	threw	his	other	arm
round	 Babur’s	 shoulders.	 ‘You	 have	 interrupted	 my	 plans	 for	 an	 early	 hawking	 expedition	 but	 I’m	 still
pleased	to	see	you.	Come.’	He	gestured	towards	a	large	square	tent.
Rich	 carpets	 covered	 the	 earth	 and	 brocade	 hangings	 concealed	 the	 hide	 walls	 and	 ceiling.	 Mahmud
hooded	 his	 falcon	 and	 returned	 it	 to	 its	 golden	 perch,	 then	 flung	 himself	 on	 to	 a	 pile	 of	 plump	 velvet
cushions.	Babur	did	likewise.	‘I	was	sad	to	learn	of	your	father’s	death.	He	was	a	good	man	and	a	good
warrior.	May	peace	be	with	him.	We	of	course	observed	mourning	for	him	in	Kunduz.’
‘Thank	you.’	Babur	bowed	his	head.
‘And	now	my	little	cousin	is	a	king.’
‘As	you	will	be	one	day.’
Mahmud	smiled.	‘True.’
‘But	today	your	thoughts	lie	in	a	different	direction?’
Mahmud’s	smile	broadened	to	a	grin.	‘You	should	see	her,	Babur.	Skin	like	silk,	slender	as	a	willow
wand	and	nearly	as	tall	as	I	am.	I	will	have	her,	I	have	sworn	to,	and	I	will	not	break	my	word.’
‘Where	did	you	meet?’
‘Don’t	worry	–	I	didn’t	disguise	myself	as	a	woman	and	slip	into	the	grand	vizier’s	harem.	It	happened
last	 year	 while	 she	 was	 accompanying	 her	 father	 on	 an	 embassy	 from	 Samarkand	 to	 Kunduz.	 Brigands
attacked	 their	 party	 soon	 after	 they	 had	 crossed	 our	 northern	 borders.	 I	 and	 my	 troops	 had	 been	 sent	 to
meet	them.	We	were	close	when	the	attack	occurred.	We	heard	the	clamour	and	rode	to	their	rescue.	That
was	when	I	saw	her	–	she	came	out	from	behind	the	rock	where	she	had	been	hiding,	her	veil	and	half	her
clothes	torn	off	.	.	.’	Mahmud	paused,	clearly	remembering	the	pleasurable	sight.
‘The	grand	vizier	should	have	been	grateful	to	you.’
‘He	was	–	but	Kunduz	is	not	as	rich	as	Kabul.’	Mahmud	shrugged.	‘And	you,	cousin,	what	brings	you
here?’
‘Beware	the	man	who	has	no	ambition.’	His	father’s	words	flickered	unbidden	through	Babur’s	mind.
But	wasn’t	it	also	right	to	be	wary	of	the	man	who	did?	Had	Mahmud	really	come	to	Samarkand	at	such	a
time	merely	for	the	sake	of	a	girl,	however	desirable?

Babur	 decided	 to	 be	 frank.	 ‘The	 King	 of	 Samarkand,	 though	 my	 father’s	 brother,	 was	 no	 friend	 to
Ferghana	and	meant	to	rob	me	of	my	throne.	But	as	he	lay	dying,	he	ordered	his	men	to	bring	me	this.’
Babur	held	out	his	hand.	Timur’s	ring,	cleansed	now	of	blood,	was	on	his	index	finger.	It	was	a	little	too
big,	but	he	had	secured	it	with	a	twist	of	red	silk.	The	metal	gleamed	in	the	light	from	a	brazier	of	burning
charcoal	and	he	heard	Mahmud’s	sharp	intake	of	breath.
‘You	believe	you	are	Timur’s	heir?’
‘His	blood	runs	in	my	veins.	I	will	have	his	city.’
‘His	blood	runs	in	my	veins	also,’	Mahmud	said	slowly.	Their	eyes	met	and	suddenly	there	was	nothing
boyish	about	either	of	them.	Babur	felt	glad	of	the	dagger	in	its	jewelled	scabbard	tucked	into	the	mauve
sash	around	his	waist.
‘Don’t	 worry,	 little	 cousin	 –	 though	 perhaps	 I	 should	 not	 call	 you	 “little”.	 I	 have	 seen	 kinder
expressions	on	the	faces	of	she-wolves	whose	young	I’ve	just	slain.’	Mahmud	was	grinning	again.	‘True,	I
came	to	Samarkand	because	I	guessed	there	would	be	confusion	in	the	city.	But	look	around	my	camp	and
you	will	see	I’ve	brought	no	more	than	a	few	hundred	men.	I	never	planned	to	seize	the	city,	merely	to
raid	 it,	 steal	 some	 of	 its	 wealth	 and	 quell	 this	 fire	 in	 my	 loins.’	 He	 pulled	 a	 face	 and	 gave	 his	 groin	 a
playful	rub.
‘I	wish	you	luck.	May	the	fire	soon	be	quenched.’
‘And	you,	cousin,	how	many	men	have	you?’
‘When	my	main	force	arrives,	we	will	be	more	than	six	thousand	strong,	including	many	archers.’	In
reality,	Babur’s	army	totalled	some	five	thousand	but	it	would	do	no	harm	to	exaggerate	a	little.
Mahmud	looked	impressed.	‘I	didn’t	think	Ferghana	could	muster	so	many.’
‘Many	are	my	own	retainers	and	their	men,	but	others	are	from	the	hill	tribes.’
‘Let’s	attack	together.’	Mahmud	grasped	Babur’s	wrist.	‘When	you	have	the	grand	vizier’s	head	on	a
spear,	I	shall	have	my	wife.’
‘Why	 not?’	 Babur	 smiled	 back.	 With	 his	 superior	 forces	 there	 could	 be	 little	 danger	 of	 Mahmud
outmanoeuvring	him	and	taking	the	throne.

Two	months	later	the	winter	winds	whipping	around	them	were	not	as	bitter	as	the	pain	Babur	felt	as	his
men	plodded	wearily	eastwards	back	towards	Ferghana.	The	horses,	shaggy	manes	clotted	with	ice,	were
sinking	into	the	snow	to	their	hocks.	As	they	snorted	with	the	effort,	their	breath	rose	in	clouds	of	mist.	In
some	places	the	drifts	were	so	deep	that	the	men	dismounted	to	relieve	the	animals	of	their	weight	and
struggled	 along	 beside	 them.	 Much	 of	 the	 baggage	 lay	 scattered	 and	 abandoned	 on	 the	 snowy	 wastes
behind	them.
This	was	not	how	it	should	have	been,	Babur	thought	grimly.	The	ring	on	his	finger	with	its	piece	of	red
silk	still	hung	a	little	loose.	It	seemed	vainglorious	now,	a	testament	to	his	failure	and	humiliation.
Wazir	 Khan	 was	 by	 his	 side,	 shrouded	 in	 a	 heavy	 wool	 blanket	 with	 frost	 mantling	 his	 beard	 and
brows.	Wise	Wazir	Khan	who	had	urged	him	to	abandon	their	assaults	when	the	pale	skies	pregnant	with
snow	announced	that	winter	had	come	early	and	vengefully.	But	Babur	had	not	listened	–	not	even	when
Mahmud	 turned	 for	 home,	 the	 longing	 in	 his	 loins	 unsatisfied,	 or	 when	 his	 own	 paid	 allies,	 the	 hill
tribesmen,	rode	away,	cursing	about	loot	promised	but	not	provided.	And	now	he	was	paying	the	price	for
his	stubbornness	and	pride.	The	walls	of	Samarkand	were	unbreached	and	inside	them	the	grand	vizier
was	sitting	snug	with	the	crown	that	was	not	his	and	with	the	daughter	for	whom	he	had	such	great	plans	–

her	maidenhead	destined	for	the	son	of	the	King	of	Kabul,	not	Mahmud.
‘Majesty,	 we	 will	 return.’	 Wazir	 Khan	 as	 usual	 had	 read	 his	 mind.	 His	 words	 forced	 through	 frostbitten	 lips	 came	 slowly.	 ‘This	 was	 only	 a	 raid.	 We	 saw	 a	 chance	 and	 took	 it,	 but	 circumstances	 were
against	us.’
‘It	hurts	me,	Wazir	Khan.	When	I	think	of	what	might	have	been,	I	feel	a	pain	sharp	as	any	cut	from	a
blade	.	.	.’
‘But	 it	 has	 given	 you	 your	 first	 experience	 of	 warfare.	 Next	 time	 we’ll	 be	 better	 prepared	 and
equipped,	and	you	will	know	the	sweetness	of	success.’
In	spite	of	his	misery,	the	words	cheered	Babur.	He	was	young.	He	already	had	one	kingdom.	It	was	not
weakness	 to	 recognise	 the	 inevitable	 –	 that	 he	 could	 not	 take	 Samarkand	 this	 winter.	 Weakness	 lay	 in
despair,	 in	 giving	 up	 while	 he	 still	 had	 breath	 in	 his	 lungs	 and	 strength	 in	 his	 arms,	 and	 that	 he	 would
never	 do.	 ‘I	 will	 return,’	 he	 shouted,	 above	 the	 howling	 of	 the	 wind,	 and	 lifting	 his	 head	 gave	 the	 war
whoop	his	father	had	taught	him.	The	defiant	sound	was	swallowed	by	the	wintry	storm	but	continued	to
echo	in	Babur’s	head.

	
	
	

Chapter	4
Into	the	Fat	City
	

How	lucky	that	a	winter	that	had	descended	so	cruelly	early	had	been	followed	by	a	premature	spring.
From	the	balcony	of	his	chamber	Babur	watched	boys	casting	stones	on	to	the	frozen	Jaxartes,	saw	the	ice
fissure	and	the	waters	surge	up.	A	few	unwary	sheep	that	had	wandered	on	to	the	frozen	watercourse	were
borne	away	in	the	chill	torrent.	Their	thin,	high-pitched	bleating	lasted	only	a	few	seconds.
On	the	plains	beyond	the	Jaxartes,	his	chiefs	were	again	assembled	with	their	men.	This	time	he	had
sent	 his	 messengers	 even	 further,	 calling	 in	 the	 nomad	 tribes	 from	 north,	 south,	 east	 and	 west	 and
promising	them	rich	booty.	With	Shaibani	Khan	still	in	his	winter	quarters	in	the	far	north,	this	must	be	the
moment	to	strike,	Babur	thought.	Soon	he	would	give	the	command	to	ride.
But	 before	 he	 embarked	 on	 his	 unfinished	 business	 of	 Samarkand	 he	 must	 pay	 his	 respects	 to	 his
mother.	 He	 hurried	 to	 her	 apartments.	 This	 time,	 his	 reflection	 in	 Kutlugh	 Nigar’s	 mirror	 of	 burnished
brass	 looked	 very	 different	 from	 when	 he	 had	 gazed	 on	 it	 in	 the	 dark,	 uncertain	 hours	 after	 his	 father’s
death.	A	few	weeks	ago	he	had	celebrated	his	thirteenth	birthday.	Hairs	sprouted	on	his	chin	and	he	was
taller	and	broader.	His	voice	had	deepened	and	Timur’s	ring	no	longer	hung	loose	on	his	hand.
‘You	are	becoming	a	man,	my	son.’	There	was	pride	in	his	mother’s	voice	as	she	kissed	him	farewell.
Even	his	grandmother	seemed	satisfied	–	and	it	took	much	to	please	the	stern	old	woman,	whose	face	was
as	wrinkled	as	a	dried	apricot	but	whose	shrewd	dark	eyes	missed	nothing.
‘When	the	city	is	mine	I	will	send	for	you	all.’
‘You	promise?’	Khanzada	thrust	out	her	chin.
‘I	promise.’	He	bent	to	kiss	the	sister	who	was	now,	to	Babur’s	satisfaction,	a	good	six	inches	shorter
than	he.
As	he	strode	away	through	the	harem,	he	passed	an	open	door.	In	the	windowless	chamber	within,	lit	by
the	soft	light	of	a	row	of	oil	lamps,	a	tall	young	woman	in	bodice	and	wide	trousers	of	pink	flowered	silk
was	bending	forward,	combing	her	flowing	hair.	Babur	stepped	beneath	the	low	lintel.
As	 soon	 as	 she	 saw	 him,	 she	 knelt	 before	 him	 so	 that	 her	 forehead	 touched	 the	 ground	 and	 her	 hair
flowed	round	her	like	a	pool	of	shining	water.	‘Greetings,	Babur,	King	of	Ferghana.	May	God	smile	on
you.’	Her	voice,	low	but	clear,	held	the	cadences	of	the	mountain	people	of	the	north.
‘You	may	rise.’
She	got	up	gracefully.	Her	eyes	were	elongated,	her	figure	slender	and	her	skin	the	colour	of	honey.	In
the	corner	of	her	chamber	Babur	noticed	two	rustic	wooden	chests	with	garments	tumbling	out	of	them.
‘I	was	tired	after	my	journey.	I	ordered	my	attendants	to	leave	me	.	.	.’	She	paused	and	Babur	noticed
uncertainty	in	her	face,	as	if	she	was	weighing	something	up.	He	turned	to	go.	There	was	still	much	for
him	to	see	to	before	the	army	departed.
‘I	thank	you,	Majesty,	for	summoning	me	here.’	She	took	a	step	towards	him	and	he	caught	her	musky
scent.
‘My	father’s	concubine	is,	of	course,	welcome	in	my	house.’
‘And	his	son	by	his	concubine?’

Babur	felt	a	flash	of	irritation.	‘Of	course.’	This	woman,	Roxanna	–	the	daughter	of	some	petty	chief	–
had	no	right	to	question	him	so.	He’d	only	learned	of	her	existence	a	few	weeks	ago.	For	some	reason	his
father	had	chosen	not	to	bring	her	to	his	castle	but	had	left	her	among	her	own	people	to	be	visited	and
tumbled	when	he	was	away	on	hunting	trips.	He	had	told	no	one	of	her.	Neither	had	he	revealed	that	eight
years	ago,	when	she	could	have	been	no	more	than	fourteen,	she	had	borne	him	a	son,	Jahangir.
When,	in	the	first	days	after	the	snows	had	ceased	to	fall,	Roxanna’s	father	had	arrived	at	the	castle,	no
one	had	paid	much	attention	to	the	shabby	tribal	chief	with	his	straggling	beard.	Then	he	had	drawn	from
his	sheepskin	robes	a	letter	written	by	Babur’s	father	acknowledging	Roxanna	as	his	concubine	and	her
young	son	as	his	seed.	It	asked	that	if	anything	happened	to	him,	they	should	be	admitted	to	the	protection
of	the	royal	harem.
Kutlugh	 Nigar	 had	 responded	 with	 barely	 a	 shrug.	 It	 had	 been	 her	 husband’s	 right	 to	 take	 as	 many
concubines	as	he	wanted	and,	indeed,	three	other	wives.	She	knew	she	had	been	his	great	love,	his	daily
companion,	the	mother	of	his	son	and	heir.	No	other	couple	on	earth	could	have	matched	the	depth	of	their
physical	and	mental	compatibility.	The	sole	shadow	in	their	union	had	been	that	only	two	of	their	children
had	survived.	The	unexpected	existence	of	Roxanna	and	Babur’s	half-brother	mattered	not	to	her	–	or	so
she	 had	 insisted	 to	 Babur	 who,	 embarrassed	 like	 all	 young	 people	 to	 discuss	 his	 parents’	 affairs	 of	 the
heart,	had	tried	to	curtail	the	conversation.	‘Let	her	come	with	her	brat,’	she	had	concluded	coldly.	Later,
Babur	noticed	that	she	had	ordered	Roxanna	to	be	given	apartments	near	her	own.	Out	of	sympathy	for	a
young	woman	alone	among	strangers?	No.	So	that	she	could	keep	an	eye	on	her.
‘You	are	gracious,	Majesty.’	Roxanna	was	smiling	at	him	now.	‘Your	brother	thanks	you	also.’
Half-brother	 only,	 Babur	 thought,	 and	 did	 not	 smile	 back.	 He	 hadn’t	 seen	 him	 yet.	 The	 child	 was
apparently	ill	with	a	fever	–	no	doubt	bitten	by	fleas	or	a	sheep	tick,	Kutlugh	Nigar	had	said	on	learning	of
it.	‘May	your	son	soon	be	blessed	by	the	return	of	good	health,’	Babur	said.	Courteous	words	but	he	knew
they	sounded	cold.	He	meant	them	to.	Turning	on	his	heel	he	walked	swiftly	away,	his	mind	already	on	the
great	game	that	awaited	him.

This	 time	 he	 had	 nearly	 eight	 thousand	 men	 under	 arms	 Babur	 thought,	 with	 pride,	 as	 the	 ranks	 of	 his
horsemen	fanned	west	across	the	plains.	Behind	them	rode	his	liegemen	and	their	forces,	then	the	motley
contingents	 of	 the	 tribal	 chiefs,	 like	 the	 wild	 Chakraks,	 who	 dwelled	 in	 the	 high	 wilderness	 between
Ferghana	and	Kashgar	with	their	horses,	sheep	and	the	shaggy	yaks	they	preferred	to	cattle.	The	baggage
wagons,	 hauled	 by	 long-horned	 oxen,	 creaked	 and	 groaned	 under	 the	 weight	 of	 equipment.	 This	 time
Babur	had	left	nothing	to	chance.	Again	and	again,	in	his	councils	of	war,	he	had	gone	over	everything	he
would	 need	 for	 a	 lengthy	 campaign,	 from	 siege	 engines	 to	 ladders	 to	 be	 placed	 against	 Samarkand’s
walls,	to	the	cooking	pots	required	to	feed	so	many	men,	to	the	musicians	who	would	play	to	lighten	their
spirits	and	give	them	the	appetite	for	victory.
During	 the	 inactive	 winter	 months	 Babur,	 with	 Wazir	 Khan,	 had	 also	 considered	 how	 best	 to	 ensure
Ferghana’s	 safety	 in	 his	 absence.	 He	 had	 decided	 to	 leave	 his	 vizier	 Kasim,	 whose	 loyalty	 and
competence	were	beyond	question,	as	regent.	There	had	been	no	reports	of	Uzbek	incursions,	and	if	any
danger	should	threaten,	Kasim	would	at	once	send	word	to	him.
What	mattered	now	was	to	anticipate	every	move	his	enemies	in	Samarkand	might	make.	Babur	knew
that,	once	again,	the	grand	vizier	–	now	daring	openly	to	call	himself	King	of	Samarkand	–	would	have
been	warned	of	his	coming.	The	city’s	granaries	would	still	be	well	stocked	with	last	autumn’s	harvest

and	its	gates	and	walls	manned	by	soldiers	whose	loyalty	the	vizier	had	plenty	of	money	to	buy.
After	ten	days’	hard	riding,	Qolba	Hill	came	into	view.	Babur	did	not	wait	for	the	return	of	the	scouts
Wazir	Khan	had	sent	ahead	but	kicked	his	grey	horse	across	the	emerald	grasslands,	still	spongy	with	the
moisture	 from	 melted	 snow	 and	 dotted	 with	 the	 yellow,	 pink	 and	 white	 of	 spring	 flowers.	 His	 horse
disturbed	one	of	the	pheasants	for	which	the	area	was	famed	–	it	rose	into	the	air	with	a	whir	of	wings
and	 a	 cackle	 of	 alarm.	 Babur’s	 heart	 leaped	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 great	 domes	 and	 minarets	 of	 Samarkand
outlined	against	the	sky.	Strong,	high	walls	surrounded	the	city	and	within	them	Babur’s	sharp	eyes	made
out	a	second	set	girdling	the	inner	citadel	built	by	Timur	to	protect	his	ultimate	stronghold,	the	four-storey
Kok	 Saray.	 In	 the	 years	 since	 his	 death	 it	 had	 acquired	 an	 evil	 reputation.	 Babur	 had	 grown	 up	 with
stories	of	the	torture,	murder	and	blindings	of	ambitious	princes	and	nobles	invited	to	the	Kok	Saray	to
feast	and	never	seen	again.
He	wheeled	his	horse	to	a	standstill.	Even	from	this	distance	he	could	sense	the	city’s	watchfulness,	as
if	it	was	a	great	creature,	tense	and	waiting.	Many	eyes	would	be	looking	out,	trying	to	assess	when	and
from	which	direction	Babur	would	come	and	how	many	men	he	would	bring.	Spies	would	have	observed
every	step	of	their	three-hundred-mile	journey	west	from	Ferghana.
This	 time	 there	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 any	 other	 army.	 Babur	 grinned,	 wondering	 how	 his	 lovelorn	 cousin
Mahmud	was	faring.	Doubtless	he	had	already	found	himself	another	woman	to	sate	his	throbbing	loins	–
but	if	he	still	wanted	her,	Babur	vowed,	the	grand	vizier’s	daughter	would	be	his.	He	would	send	her	as	a
gift.

‘You	must	have	patience,	Majesty,’	Wazir	Khan	said,	as	he	had	every	day	for	the	past	five	months.
Babur	scowled	into	the	basket	of	glowing	charcoals	Wazir	Khan	had	lit	to	warm	them	as	they	squatted
in	the	middle	of	a	grove	of	trees,	well	beyond	the	camp	with	its	prying	ears	and	eyes.	They	needed	the
warmth.	Autumn	was	coming	and	the	night	air	was	bone-numbingly	chill.	‘We	have	traitors	in	our	midst,	I
am	sure	of	it.	Every	time	we	attack	a	section	of	the	walls	or	try	to	tunnel	beneath,	the	enemy	seem	to	know
and	to	be	ready	for	us.’	Babur	poked	the	charcoal	with	the	tip	of	his	dagger.
‘Every	camp	has	its	spies,	Majesty.	It	is	inevitable.	And	don’t	we	also	have	our	own	spies?’
‘But	they	tell	us	nothing.’
‘They	will,	when	there	is	something	to	tell.	We	have	held	the	city	under	siege	for	five	months.	We	still
have	 food	 and	 water	 but	 the	 enemy’s	 must	 be	 running	 low.	 Soon	 they	 will	 have	 to	 send	 out	 foraging
parties.	We	must	set	our	spies	to	watch	for	them	and	learn	their	secret	exits.	What	cannot	be	taken	by	force
may	be	taken	by	stealth.’
Babur	grunted.	Wazir	Khan,	so	wise	and	level-headed	–	the	man	who	since	the	time	Babur	first	stood
unaided	had	tutored	him	in	the	arts	of	war	–	was	good	at	reminding	him	how	much	he	still	needed	to	learn.
All	the	same,	the	last	months	had	taught	him	much.	In	the	scorching	heat	of	summer,	he	had	learned	that
grass	growing	brighter	and	taller	than	anywhere	else	was	a	sign	of	hidden	water	channels.	He	had	learned
how	to	drill	his	men	and	keep	them	active	and	high-spirited	when	there	was	no	fighting	to	be	done.	He
had	 ordered	 them	 to	 play	 polo	 insolently	 close	 to	 Samarkand’s	 high	 walls	 and,	 braving	 the	 city’s	 best
archers,	had	joined	in,	thundering	over	the	ground	to	swipe	his	mallet	at	the	sheep’s-head	ball,	which	–
when	they	had	finished	–	they	had	lobbed	contemptuously	over	the	battlements.
Babur	knew	now	how	to	move	silently	through	the	darkness	with	his	men	and	to	position	long	ladders,
the	tops	wrapped	in	sheep’s	wool	to	deaden	any	sound,	against	the	high	walls.	He	had	climbed	with	them,

only	to	be	met	by	missiles,	clouds	of	arrows	and	buckets	of	burning	pitch,	and	forced	to	retreat.	He	had
crept	 along	 dark,	 sandy	 tunnels	 dug	 by	 his	 men	 towards	 the	 walls,	 hoping	 to	 burrow	 beneath	 them	 but
encountering	foundations	as	unyielding	as	the	mountains	of	Ferghana.
Babur	had	also	attacked	by	day,	his	sweating	men	dragging	up	the	great	siege	engines	which	had	hurled
massive	rocks.	But	Samarkand’s	metal-bound	gates	and	thick	walls	had	withstood	these	barrages,	and	the
pounding	of	his	battering	rams.
‘I	don’t	understand.	The	King	of	Samarkand	was	my	uncle.	I’m	directly	of	the	blood	of	Timur.	I’ve	sent
assurances	that	I’ll	not	put	the	city	to	the	sword.	Why	don’t	the	people	open	their	gates	to	me	of	their	own
accord?	Why	do	they	prefer	the	rule	of	a	usurping	vizier?’
Wazir	Khan’s	patient	half-smile	again	told	Babur	that	he	had	spoken	with	the	ignorance	of	youth,	not	the
wisdom	 of	 maturity.	 ‘Perhaps	 he	 rules	 them	 by	 fear.	 Remember	 also	 that	 the	 people	 do	 not	 know	 you.
Since	 Timur	 died,	 Samarkand	 has	 been	 besieged	 by	 many	 chiefs	 and	 kings	 hungry	 for	 glory	 and	 gold,
claiming	 kinship	 with	 the	 great	 conqueror.	 Your	 own	 uncle	 seized	 the	 city	 by	 force.	 Why	 should	 the
citizens	look	kindly	on	any	aggressor?	With	the	grand	vizier	they	at	least	know	what	they	have.’
The	hoot	of	an	owl	made	them	look	up	at	the	sky,	in	which	the	stars	were	already	fading.
‘We	should	return,	Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan	pushed	the	brazier	over	and	kicked	earth	over	the	still	burning
charcoal.
It	wasn’t	only	the	loss	of	their	heat	that	made	Babur	shiver.	‘Wazir	Khan,	I’m	worried.	If	we	don’t	take
the	city	soon,	winter	will	be	upon	us	and	my	armies	will	melt	away	once	more.	I’ll	be	forced	to	return	a
second	time	to	Ferghana	without	victory.	Then	what	will	my	people	say	about	me?’
Wazir	Khan	gripped	his	arm.	‘We	still	have	time.	The	sun	has	yet	to	enter	the	sign	of	the	balance.	God
willing,	Samarkand	will	fall.’
He	 was	 right,	 Babur	 reflected.	 His	 father	 had	 endured	 many	 setbacks	 but	 had	 never	 despaired.	 What
was	it	he	used	to	say?	‘If	your	soldiers	see	you	falter,	then	all	is	lost.	They	look	to	you	for	leadership	and
discipline.’	Yes,	it	was	a	king’s	duty	to	be	strong.	He	must	remember	that.
They	mounted	their	horses	and	rode	back	towards	the	camp.	As	they	drew	nearer,	Babur	heard,	above
the	rhythm	of	galloping	hoofs,	a	man	shouting	in	anger.	Not	another	dispute	between	the	lawless	rogues
who	made	up	so	much	of	his	army?	he	thought	wearily	as	the	sounds	grew	louder	and	more	strident	and
oaths	split	the	air.
The	commotion	was	coming	from	near	the	bathhouse	tents.	As	he	and	Wazir	Khan	rode	up,	Babur	saw
that	one	of	his	mercenary	commanders	–	a	nomad	from	the	wildernesses	–	was	examining	the	contents	of
two	 sacks	 with	 a	 couple	 of	 his	 scar-faced	 warriors.	 Another	 man,	 a	 simple	 farmer	 by	 his	 clothes,	 was
watching.	‘You’ve	no	right	to	steal	from	me.	How	will	I	feed	my	family	this	winter	when	you’ve	taken
everything	 –	 my	 grain,	 even	 my	 sheep?’	 The	 man	 gestured	 at	 the	 small	 flock	 of	 shaggy,	 brown-fleeced
animals	tethered	close	by.	He	was	almost	weeping	with	anger.
There	could	have	been	something	ludicrous	about	this	thin,	insignificant	peasant	stamping	in	rage	and
frustration	before	warriors	who	could	have	flattened	him	with	a	swipe	of	their	hard	fists,	but	his	defiance
was	impressive,	Babur	thought.
‘Get	back	to	your	midden	and	think	yourself	lucky	you	go	with	your	life.	And	when	you	see	your	wife,
give	her	another	kiss	from	me	and	tell	her	I	enjoyed	her,’	grinned	one	of	the	warriors	who	then	launched	a
kick	at	the	peasant,	sending	him	sprawling.	When	the	man	tried	to	get	up,	he	kicked	him	again.
‘What	is	happening	here?’
Taken	by	surprise,	the	men	stared	up	at	Babur.
‘Answer	His	Majesty,’	rapped	Wazir	Khan.	Still	no	answer	came.
‘Get	up.’	Babur	gestured	to	the	farmer,	who	rose	slowly	and	painfully,	clutching	his	stomach,	his	lined

face	apprehensive.	If	he	hated	the	soldiers,	plainly	he	had	no	faith	in	kings	either.	He	backed	away	from
the	imperious	youth	on	the	horse	with	the	jewelled	bridle.
‘Stay	where	you	are.’	Babur	leaped	down	and	surveyed	the	tableau.	The	two	jute	sacks	lolled	before
him,	their	pathetic	contents	spilling	out.	Babur	ripped	off	his	leather	gauntlet,	plunged	his	hand	into	one
and	pulled	out	some	dun	garments,	a	wooden	cup	and	a	couple	of	cotton	bags.	Opening	the	bags	he	found
only	 some	 mouldy-looking	 grain	 intermixed	 with	 dark	 mouse	 droppings.	 The	 other	 sack	 felt	 heavier.
Inside	were	half	a	dozen	skinny	chickens,	necks	newly	wrung,	and	a	round	cheese,	the	rind	clotted	with
feathers	and	chicken	blood.
Babur	pushed	the	sacks	aside	but	noticed	the	farmer	gazing	at	them	as	if	they	represented	everything	he
held	dear	in	this	life.	‘Where	did	this	come	from?’	Babur	demanded.	Silence.	‘I	said	where	did	this	come
from?’	The	second	time	of	asking	he	looked	straight	into	the	farmer’s	face.
‘From	my	village,	Majesty,	across	the	Zerafshan	river.’
‘And	all	of	it	was	taken	from	you?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘By	force?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.	By	these	two	men.’
‘And	your	wife.	They	took	her	by	force?’
The	man	hung	his	head.
Babur	turned	to	the	commander.	‘I	gave	orders	that	there	was	to	be	no	looting	from	the	villagers,	that
we	would	pay	our	way.	Timur’s	heir	does	not	come	to	ravage	poor	people	and	spill	their	blood	upon	on
the	earth.’
The	nomad	glared	at	him.	‘We’ve	been	here	many	weeks.	We’ve	taken	nothing.	No	booty	worth	a	fly’s
arse.	My	men	are	weary.	They	needed	some	sport.	And	all	they’ve	taken	is	a	few	paltry	things	from	this
maggot	of	a	farmer.’
‘And	raped	his	wife.’
‘They	say	she	was	not	unwilling.’	The	chief	grinned,	showing	gaps	in	his	broad,	tombstone	teeth.
Anger	surged	through	Babur.	He	would	have	liked	to	run	these	men	through	with	his	sword,	here	and
now,	 like	 the	 animals	 they	 were,	 and	 kick	 their	 brainless	 heads	 on	 to	 the	 dung	 heap.	 ‘Arrest	 the	 two
looters,	Wazir	Khan.	They	are	guilty	of	plunder	and	rape.	They	know	the	penalty.	I	wish	it	to	be	carried
out	immediately	in	the	presence	of	the	other	members	of	their	tribe.’
Wazir	 Khan	 raised	 his	 hand	 and	 guards	 stepped	 forward	 to	 seize	 the	 tribesmen	 who,	 instead	 of
resisting,	stood	blinking	stupidly	as	if	what	was	happening	was	beyond	their	comprehension.
‘As	for	you.’	Babur	turned	to	their	chief	who	was	smirking	no	longer.	Babur	noticed	his	fingers	feeling
for	his	dagger	in	the	greasy	swathe	of	brown	woollen	cloth	wrapped	round	his	waist,	and	tensed	his	body,
ready	in	case	the	fool	should	lash	out.	‘You	swore	an	oath	of	allegiance	to	me	that	on	this	campaign	you
would	be	bound	by	my	laws	or	suffer	the	consequences.	If	you	cannot	control	your	men	in	future	you	will
suffer	the	same	fate.’	Babur’s	voice	was	laden	with	menace.	‘You	will	acknowledge	publicly	that	this	is
justice	–	royal	justice.	I	will	have	no	blood	feuds	in	my	camp.	Summon	all	your	men	here,	now!’
The	chief’s	eyes	swung	between	Babur,	Wazir	Khan	and	the	guards	gripping	the	arms	of	the	two	now
desperate-looking	looters.	Babur	read	murder	in	his	gaze	and	in	his	heart	but,	with	a	muttered	oath,	the
chief	slowly	lowered	his	hand	from	his	dagger	and	bowed	his	shaved	head	in	submission.
Ten	minutes	later,	the	twenty	other	members	of	the	small	clan	were	gathered	in	a	silent	circle	around
the	condemned	men.	At	a	nod	from	Babur	the	chief	cleared	his	throat	and	addressed	the	prisoners:	‘You
have	broken	laws	that	I	had	sworn	to	uphold.	I,	as	your	chief,	give	you	up	to	suffer	justice.	Your	bodies
will	be	hewn	to	pieces	and	left	for	dogs	and	carrion.	Let	every	man	here	understand	that	it	is	my	will	that

this	should	happen.	There	will	be	no	blood	feud	against	the	executioners.’
Wazir	Khan	signalled	a	detachment	of	his	guards	to	step	forward.	Swords	drawn	they	advanced	on	the
quivering	prisoners	and	forced	them	to	their	knees.	The	men’s	screams	rose	in	the	cold	early	morning	air
as	the	shining	blades	cut	into	them.
Babur	felt	his	gorge	rise	and	breathed	deeply	to	steady	himself.	This	was	the	law.	He	had	only	done
what	any	leader	must	to	maintain	discipline	and	respect.	He	did	not	allow	himself	to	turn	away	until	the
screaming	had	stopped	and	all	was	quiet	except	for	the	cawing	of	birds	of	prey	quick	to	spot	a	feast.
‘Take	your	possessions	and	this.’	Babur	held	out	a	purse	of	camel	leather	filled	with	silver	coins	to	the
dazed	farmer	who	stared	at	it	for	a	moment	then	grabbed	it.	Babur	had	already	turned	his	back	when	he
heard	the	man	clear	his	throat	and	hesitantly	begin	to	speak.
‘What	is	it?’	Babur	felt	wearied	and	disgusted	–	even	by	the	farmer,	so	skinny	and	abject.	Nothing	that
had	 happened	 had	 been	 his	 fault	 but	 had	 he	 been	 more	 of	 a	 man	 and	 stood	 up	 to	 the	 looters	 when	 they
came	to	his	village	.	.	.	Babur	dismissed	the	thought	as	unworthy.	The	man	was	a	toiler,	not	a	warrior,	and
he	had	had	the	courage	to	come	to	the	camp	to	seek	justice.
‘Majesty	 .	 .	 .	 there	 is	 something	 you	 should	 know	 .	 .	 .	 something	 I	 saw	 with	 my	 own	 eyes	 just	 three
nights	ago	when	the	moon	was	full.’
‘What?	.	.	.	speak.’
‘I	saw	men	–	spies,	perhaps	–	leave	the	city.	I	waited,	hidden	behind	the	trees,	while	my	sheep	grazed,
and	 many	 hours	 later	 I	 watched	 them	 return.	 There	 is	 a	 passage	 leading	 into	 Samarkand	 –	 beside	 the
Needlemaker’s	Gate.	I	can	show	it	to	you,	Majesty.’
Babur’s	heart	leaped.	‘If	you’re	telling	the	truth,	you’ll	have	more	than	that	paltry	bag	of	silver	–	you’ll
have	your	weight	in	gold.’

‘Majesty,	this	is	insanity.’
‘Perhaps.’	 Babur	 felt	 a	 visceral	 excitement	 uncurling	 within	 him.	 In	 a	 few	 hours	 he	 would	 be	 inside
Samarkand.
‘At	least	let	me	come	with	you.’
‘No,	Wazir	Khan.	Who’ll	pay	attention	to	a	ragged	youth?	But	there	are	men	in	Samarkand	who	know
you.	I’m	safer	alone.’
For	 once	 Wazir	 Khan	 seemed	 nonplussed.	 The	 scar	 across	 his	 blind	 eye	 looked	 more	 puckered	 than
usual.	‘But	you	are	the	king,’	he	said	stubbornly.	‘What	will	happen	to	Ferghana	if	you	do	not	return?’
‘I	will	return.	Now	let	me	go.’
Babur	mounted	the	stocky,	sure-footed	dark	pony	he	had	chosen	and,	without	a	backward	glance,	rode
off	into	the	night.
Moonlight	silvered	the	rough	track	following	the	westward	course	of	the	stream	that	Babur,	Wazir	Khan
and	the	farmer	had	ridden	along	the	previous	night.	Every	inch	of	the	way	seemed	burned	into	his	brain.
He	was	riding	through	the	Khan	Yurti	meadow	where	–	as	his	father	had	so	often	told	him	–	Timur	had
once	pitched	his	pleasure	pavilions	in	summer	to	lie	beneath	the	silken	canopies	and	listen	to	the	waters,
as	 cool	 and	 pure	 as	 those	 coursing	 through	 the	 gardens	 of	 Paradise.	 Now	 the	 sound	 of	 rippling	 water
seemed	to	carry	the	great	Timur’s	voice:	‘Go	forward.	Dare	everything.’
After	an	hour	the	stream	branched	and	Babur	followed	the	left-hand	fork,	which	he	knew	flowed	south
within	 half	 a	 mile	 of	 the	 great	 Turquoise	 Gate.	 He	 must	 be	 careful.	 Keen	 eyes	 watching	 from	 the

battlements	 might	 spy	 even	 a	 lone	 rider	 if	 he	 ventured	 too	 close.	 He	 would	 keep	 to	 the	 far	 side	 of	 the
stream	where	he	could	merge	into	the	shadows	of	the	willow	trees	along	its	banks	and	move	insubstantial
as	a	ghost.
Wazir	Khan	was	right,	of	course.	This	was	insanity.	If	Babur	wished	to	know	the	city’s	weak	spots	and
the	mood	of	its	inhabitants	after	all	these	months	of	siege	he	should	have	sent	spies	into	the	tunnel,	not
gone	himself	–	alone.	But	from	the	moment	the	farmer	had	uttered	his	few,	hesitant	words,	Babur	had	felt
the	hand	of	destiny	thrust	him	forward.
The	 sky	 was	 cloudless	 and	 clear	 above	 the	 drooping	 willow	 branches.	 Across	 the	 stream,	 he	 could
make	out	the	shadowy	outline	of	the	city.	A	few	minutes	more	and	the	Turquoise	Gate	would	rear	like	a
dragon	out	of	the	darkness.	One	day	soon,	Babur	promised	himself,	I’ll	ride	through	that	gate	at	the	head
of	my	men,	not	sneak	into	my	city	like	a	thief	in	the	night.
A	small	creature	–	a	mouse,	perhaps,	or	a	river	rat	–	ran	beneath	his	pony’s	hoofs	causing	it	to	skitter
sideways,	 neighing	 in	 alarm.	 Babur	 slipped	 down	 and	 ran	 his	 hand	 soothingly	 along	 the	 pony’s	 soft,
shaggy	neck.	It	would	be	better	to	go	forward	on	foot	from	here.	Babur	pulled	off	the	bridle	and	the	thick
folded	blanket	on	which	he	had	been	sitting,	then	turned	the	pony	loose	to	find	its	own	way	back	to	the
camp,	as	he	had	agreed	with	Wazir	Khan.	This	time	tomorrow	night	Wazir	Khan	would	be	waiting	for	him
here	among	the	willows	with	a	fresh	mount.
Another	eight	hundred	yards	of	stealing	southwards	through	the	soft	darkness	and	he	could	see	the	red
pinpricks	of	torches	burning	on	either	side	of	the	Needlemaker’s	Gate.	Tall	and	narrow,	it	was	one	of	the
more	modest	of	Samarkand’s	six	gates.	In	ordinary	times	it	was	the	entrance	for	farmers	and	tradespeople.
Timur	would	seldom	have	passed	through	it.	For	him	there	were	the	mighty	Iron	Gate	and	the	blue-tiled
Turquoise	 Gate	 where,	 in	 the	 chambers	 high	 above	 the	 entrance	 arches,	 men	 would	 have	 pounded	 the
kettledrums	and	blown	harsh-voiced	trumpets	to	announce	his	approach.
It	was	time	to	cross	the	stream	which	was	deep	at	this	point	–	almost	a	river.	Babur	waded	in,	bracing
himself	against	the	surging	waters	that	rose	almost	to	his	shoulders.	He	was	nearly	across	when	his	feet
slipped	on	the	tumbled	stones	and	he	lost	his	footing.	Cold	waters	closed	over	his	head,	choking	him,	and
he	felt	his	body	being	carried	along.	He	managed	to	thrust	an	arm	out	of	the	water	and	winced	as	his	hand
struck	what	felt	like	the	branch	of	a	tree.	Trying	again	he	managed	to	grip	another	branch	and,	using	both
arms	now,	hauled	himself	on	to	the	bank.
Gasping,	he	pushed	his	dripping	hair	out	of	his	eyes	and	looked	around.	At	least	he	was	on	the	right
side	 of	 the	 stream.	 Instinctively	 he	 checked	 for	 Timur’s	 ring,	 which	 he	 had	 secured	 on	 a	 leather	 thong
round	 his	 neck.	 As	 his	 fingers	 came	 into	 contact	 with	 the	 rich,	 heavy	 metal	 he	 grunted	 with	 relief.	 He
crouched	in	silence,	shivering	and	listening	intently.	Nothing.	Not	the	crack	of	a	twig	or	the	soft	beat	of	a
bat’s	wing.	He	peered	towards	the	dim	outlines	of	the	Needlemaker’s	Gate.	Creeping	forward	he	came	to
the	low,	tumbled	walls	of	an	old	orchard	where,	amid	the	pomegranate	trees,	lay	the	entrance	to	the	secret
tunnel	concealed	by	a	heap	of	dead	branches.
Last	night	there	had	been	no	guard.	Babur	prayed	it	would	be	the	same	tonight.	Also	that	he	would	not
encounter	anyone	in	the	tunnel.	He	must	be	quick	–	but,	above	all,	careful.	Suppressing	the	urge	to	dart
forward	towards	the	opening,	he	forced	himself	to	find	a	hiding-place	in	the	hollow	of	an	old	tree	and	sit
still,	 watching	 and	 listening.	 You	 were	 named	 for	 the	 tiger,	 Babur	 told	 himself,	 so	 be	 like	 him	 tonight.
Shun	the	open,	love	the	shadows	and	master	your	impatience.
After	a	while,	a	young	fox	trotted	by.	Its	sharp	nose	twitched	as	it	caught	Babur’s	scent	but	it	ran	lightly
on.	 The	 animal’s	 composure	 reassured	 him	 that	 no	 other	 human	 was	 close	 by	 and	 he	 uncoiled	 from	 his
hiding-place.	His	coarse	brown	cotton	robe	and	sheepskin	jerkin	–	the	garb	of	a	humble	peasant	–	were
still	sodden	and	cold	against	his	skin.	He	shook	himself	like	a	wet	dog,	then	rubbed	himself	vigorously.

Heart	 pounding,	 he	 approached	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 tunnel	 and	 pushed	 aside	 the	 branches.	 Then	 he
wriggled	forward	on	his	stomach	and	pulled	the	branches	back	into	place	behind	him.	Stretching	out	his
hands	 he	 felt	 for	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 wooden	 trapdoor	 covering	 the	 tunnel	 entrance.	 There	 it	 was!	 As	 he
gripped	it	some	tiny	creature	–	an	ant	or	an	earwig	–	ran	across	his	fingers.	Carefully,	Babur	raised	it	and
felt	inside.	The	narrow	shaft	was	lined	with	bricks	and	wooden	supports	had	been	driven	into	the	sides.
He	climbed	in,	and	bracing	his	feet	on	two	of	the	supports	ducked	his	head	and	pulled	the	door	back	in
place	over	him.
He	was	in	pitch	darkness	and	a	dank,	unwholesome,	earthy	smell	filled	his	nostrils	as	if	something	–	or
someone	–	had	died	in	here,	which	perhaps	they	had.	Samarkand	had	had	a	glorious	past	but	also	a	violent
one.	 Who	 had	 first	 burrowed	 this	 passageway?	 he	 wondered.	 Had	 they	 been	 digging	 their	 way	 in	 or
fleeing	a	terrible	fate?
Cautiously	Babur	lowered	himself	to	the	bottom	of	the	shaft,	which	he	knew,	from	his	previous	night’s
exploration,	 was	 only	 about	 ten	 feet	 deep.	 But	 where	 did	 the	 tunnel	 lead?	 He	 felt	 his	 way	 forward,
keeping	his	hands	pressed	to	the	walls	on	either	side	of	him.	The	ground	squelched	beneath	his	feet	and
seemed	to	slope	down.	He	slipped	and	slithered	and	was	relieved	when,	after	a	few	paces,	he	felt	hard
stone.
The	 roof	 was	 low	 and	 Babur	 bent	 his	 head	 as	 he	 moved	 on	 through	 the	 darkness.	 This	 would	 be	 no
place	to	encounter	an	enemy.	How	could	a	man	defend	himself	when	he	could	not	stand	upright	and	had	no
room	 to	 swing	 a	 sword?	 Not	 that	 he	 had	 brought	 his	 father’s	 eagle-hilted	 sword	 with	 him.	 That	 would
hardly	 be	 a	 weapon	 to	 be	 found	 on	 a	 peasant	 boy	 if	 by	 any	 ill	 twist	 of	 fortune	 he	 was	 captured.	 But
without	it	he	felt	vulnerable.
It	was	also	getting	hard	to	breathe,	hunched	as	he	was	in	the	dank,	fetid	air.	He	hurried	on,	counting	the
paces	–	ten,	twenty,	thirty.	He	had	calculated	that	six	hundred	would	bring	him	to	the	city	walls	but	he	had
no	idea	how	far	the	tunnel	extended.	He	tried	to	keep	counting.	Ninety,	a	hundred.	Sweat	dripped	from	his
brow	and	ran	into	his	mouth.	Impatiently	he	flicked	away	the	salty	beads	with	his	tongue.	A	hundred	and
fifty	.	.	.	The	passageway	was	broadening	now,	wide	enough	for	two	men	to	pass.	Babur	went	faster.	He
was	almost	running.	Four	hundred	.	.	.
Then	 he	 stopped.	 What	 was	 that	 noise?	 He	 caught	 the	 unmistakable	 rumble	 of	 male	 voices	 and	 a
raucous	laugh.	All	of	a	sudden	the	passage	ahead	was	lit	by	an	orange	glow.	Babur	could	make	out	the
rough	 walls	 and	 see	 that,	 a	 few	 yards	 ahead,	 it	 twisted	 sharply	 to	 the	 left.	 The	 voices	 were	 growing
louder,	 echoing	 in	 the	 confined	 space.	 In	 a	 moment	 their	 owners	 would	 round	 the	 corner	 and	 see	 him.
Babur	turned	to	flee	into	the	darkness.	Almost	sobbing	with	frustration	he	ran	back	and	flattened	himself
in	an	alcove.	But	the	voices	were	dying	away	now.	If	the	men	were	guards	sent	to	check	the	tunnel	they
had	not	been	very	thorough.	He	allowed	himself	a	grim	smile.	Had	they	been	Wazir	Khan’s	men	they’d	be
flayed	alive	for	their	negligence.
Babur	waited.	Darkness	again	and	silence.	He	breathed	more	deeply	and	after	a	few	moments	moved
on	again.	He	had	lost	count	of	his	paces	now	but	surely	he	must	be	near	the	city	walls.	He	edged	round	the
sharp,	left-hand	bend	and	onwards.	After	another	five	minutes	he	could	make	out	pale	light	ahead,	not	the
orange	glow	of	a	torch	but	the	chill	radiance	of	the	moon	and	stars.
He	 dragged	 the	 back	 of	 his	 hand	 across	 his	 sweating	 forehead	 and	 moved	 slowly	 forwards,	 back
against	 the	 wall,	 exposing	 the	 smallest	 surface	 of	 his	 body	 in	 case	 a	 guard	 lurked	 at	 the	 far	 end,	 bowstring	taut,	arrow	ready	to	sing	out.	But	ahead	was	nothing	but	silence.	The	city	would	be	sleeping.	There
was	 enough	 light	 for	 him	 to	 make	 out	 his	 damp,	 muddy	 clothes	 and	 hands.	 No	 need	 to	 fear	 that	 anyone
would	take	him	for	a	Timurid	prince.	Inside	the	city	he	could	blend	into	the	populace,	just	another	ragged
youth	anxious	for	a	piece	of	yesterday’s	bread.

The	 tunnel	 ended	 in	 a	 huge	 circular	 pit	 filled	 with	 a	 few	 inches	 of	 putrid	 water,	 like	 the	 shaft	 of	 a
disused	well,	Babur	thought.	Peering	up,	he	could	see	the	star-pricked	canopy	of	the	night	sky.	Quietly	he
began	to	climb	up	the	side	of	the	shaft	where	metal	spikes	had	been	driven	into	the	wall.	How	many	of
these	 tunnels	 were	 there?	 No	 wonder	 the	 enemy	 had	 seemed	 to	 know	 his	 every	 plan.	 Spies	 had	 been
creeping	out	like	rats	to	infest	his	camp	and	steal	home	with	his	secrets.	But	now,	Babur	thought,	it’s	my
turn.	I’m	the	rat.
Gripping	the	carved	stone	parapet	around	the	top	of	the	well	he	heaved	himself	out	and	dropped	down
into	 the	 shadows.	 He	 was	 in	 a	 courtyard,	 empty	 but	 for	 two	 pale	 skinny	 dogs	 asleep	 in	 the	 moonlight.
Babur	saw	the	rhythmic	motion	of	their	ribs	and	heard	their	soft	whimpers.	What	a	way	for	Timur’s	heir
to	arrive	in	mighty	Samarkand	–	stinking	and	ragged,	with	only	mongrels	for	company.
And	where	exactly	was	he?	Babur	wished	he	knew.	All	he	could	do	was	hide	and	wait	for	people	to
rise	and	begin	to	move	about.	He	needed	their	camouflage.	Shivering,	he	spied	a	pile	of	woven	matting
against	 a	 wall.	 That	 would	 do.	 He	 slid	 underneath	 it	 and	 pulled	 it	 over	 him,	 concealing	 himself.
Samarkand,	he	thought.	Samarkand!	Then,	without	warning,	sleep	claimed	his	exhausted	body.

‘This	is	my	patch!	Take	your	stinking	carrots	somewhere	else.’
Babur	jolted	awake	and	peered	through	the	matting.	The	place	that,	just	a	couple	of	hours	earlier,	had
looked	so	desolate	now	thronged	with	people.	In	the	half-light	of	dawn,	they	seemed	to	be	setting	up	a
market.	 The	 voice	 that	 had	 woken	 him	 belonged	 to	 a	 tall,	 skinny	 old	 man	 flapping	 about	 in	 dark,	 dusty
robes.	Having	secured	the	piece	of	ground	he	wanted,	he	squatted	and	pulled	some	mouldy	looking	onions
from	his	pockets.
Cautiously,	Babur	slid	out	of	his	hiding-place.	Ragged,	pinched-looking	people	were	arranging	small
piles	of	equally	shrivelled	vegetables	on	pieces	of	cloth	–	carrots	that	were	mottled	and	sprouting,	a	few
wrinkled	 radishes.	 An	 elderly	 woman,	 veil	 slipping	 carelessly	 from	 her	 furrowed	 face,	 arranged	 a	 rat
with	the	care	of	an	embalmer	preparing	a	body	for	burial.	Others,	without	anything	to	sell	but	clearly	too
poor	to	buy,	were	standing	around	miserably	and	hungrily.
These	people	are	starving,	Babur	thought,	in	astonishment.	The	siege	had	been	going	on	for	months	and
he	hadn’t	expected	food	stocks	to	be	high,	but	this	.	.	.	A	baby’s	thin	mewling	caught	his	attention.	A	young
woman	too	emaciated	to	have	milk	in	her	breasts	and	with	hopelessness	in	her	eyes	dipped	a	corner	of
her	veil	into	a	jar	of	water	and	thrust	it	between	her	child’s	questing	lips.
‘It’s	 alright	 for	 them	 holed	 up	 in	 the	 citadel,’	 the	 old	 man	 said,	 then	 spat	 venomously,	 the	 phlegm
narrowly	 avoiding	 his	 stack	 of	 seven	 onions.	 ‘They’ve	 taken	 everything	 from	 us.	 They	 can	 last	 out	 for
years,	filling	their	bellies	beneath	their	fine	silk	robes	with	our	food.	Where’s	the	justice	in	that?’
‘Silence,	old	man,	you’ll	get	us	all	into	trouble.	It	will	be	as	the	grand	vizier	says.	When	the	winter
comes,	the	aggressors	will	leave	as	they	did	last	time.’
‘And	then	what?	Pay	more	taxes	to	the	vizier	in	gratitude!	That	thieving	son	of	a	whore!	And	they	say
he’d	like	our	wives	and	daughters	as	well.	His	harem	is	twice	the	size	of	the	last	king’s,	may	his	soul	rest
in	Paradise.	I’ve	heard	tell	he	enjoys	three	women	a	night.’
‘Be	 at	 peace,	 old	 man,	 your	 pockmarked	 wife	 and	 daughter	 are	 too	 ill-favoured	 even	 for	 that	 randy
goat,’	another	man	jibed.
As	the	onion-seller’s	voice	rose	angrily	in	defence	of	the	beauty	of	his	womenfolk,	Babur	slipped	from
the	square	and	down	a	side	alley.	Everywhere	it	was	the	same.	Pale	people,	with	hunger	etched	on	their

faces,	moving	slowly,	wraithlike,	as	if	every	reserve	of	energy	had	been	drained	from	them.	He	watched
an	old	woman	grin	in	toothless	delight	as	she	scooped	up	the	body	of	a	dead	cat,	holding	its	limp	form	as
tenderly	as	if	it	had	been	a	baby.	He	was	surprised	that	the	two	dogs	he	had	seen	asleep	by	the	well	had
survived	so	long.
The	pale	orange	disc	of	the	rising	sun	was	a	welcome	sight	–	it	would	give	him	his	bearings.	Babur
knew	that	if	he	kept	his	back	to	the	sun	he	should	come	to	the	walls	of	Timur’s	citadel.	It	seemed	he	was
right.	 As	 he	 hurried	 on	 he	 noticed	 the	 streets	 becoming	 broader,	 the	 buildings	 more	 elegant.	 He	 passed
bathhouses	inlaid	with	vibrant	mosaics	in	floral	and	geometric	designs,	domed	mosques	and	exquisitely
carved	madrasas	where	scholars	studied	and	prayed.
Youthful	pride	that	his	ancestor	had	created	a	city	so	beautiful	welled	inside	him.	When	he	was	King	of
Samarkand,	 the	 markets	 would	 again	 be	 full	 of	 fruit	 and	 vegetables	 from	 the	 gardens	 and	 orchards
encircling	the	city.	The	bakeries	and	cookhouses	–	empty	and	forlorn	now	–	would	once	more	scent	the
air.	The	people,	plump	and	prosperous,	would	praise	his	name.	And,	as	in	Timur’s	time,	men	of	talent	–
poets,	painters,	scholars	–	would	flock	here	from	across	the	civilised	world.	Overcome	by	the	glory	of	it
all,	Babur	closed	his	eyes.
‘Out	of	our	way,	boy.’
Something	hard	jabbed	Babur	in	the	small	of	his	back.	Instinctively	his	hand	went	to	his	waist,	seeking
the	weapon	that	wasn’t	there.	He	wheeled	round	to	see	two	soldiers,	wearing	emerald	green	sashes,	the
colour	of	Samarkand.	There	was	plenty	of	room	for	them	to	pass	but	again	one	struck	at	Babur	with	the
butt	of	his	spear,	this	time	catching	him	in	the	ribs	and	sending	him	spinning	against	the	wall.	Laughing,	the
men	swaggered	on.
Babur	stared	after	them	cat-like	and	unblinking,	but	they	didn’t	look	back.	As	soon	as	they	had	turned	a
corner	he	began	to	follow.	From	the	direction	they	had	taken,	they	must	be	making	for	the	Kok	Saray.	As
he	 tracked	 them,	 keeping	 a	 cautious	 distance,	 he	 began	 to	 find	 himself	 among	 more	 and	 more	 soldiers,
some	clearly	on	patrol	through	the	quiet,	cowed	streets,	others	returning	from	sentry	duty	on	the	city	walls.
Learning	by	experience,	he	tried	to	keep	out	of	their	way,	dodging	into	doorways	or	behind	piles	of	refuse
at	their	approach.
And	then,	looking	up,	he	saw	Timur’s	citadel,	snug	within	its	walls,	and,	at	its	heart,	the	tall	façade	of
Timur’s	 fortress,	 the	 mighty	 Kok	 Saray.	 Green	 silk	 banners	 fluttered	 from	 the	 pointed	 battlements.	 My
palace,	Babur	thought.	Unconsciously	he	felt	for	Timur’s	ring	and	clenched	it	in	his	hand.
The	 sound	 of	 marching	 feet	 on	 the	 stone-paved	 street	 broke	 his	 reverie.	 A	 detachment	 of	 troops	 was
returning	 to	 the	 citadel.	 Keeping	 well	 back,	 Babur	 observed	 them	 and	 their	 weapons	 critically.	 Tall,
muscular	 men,	 they	 showed	 no	 sign	 of	 malnutrition	 and	 carried	 themselves	 like	 warriors.	 Again,	 they
wore	 the	 bright	 green	 sashes	 of	 Samarkand.	 How	 much	 was	 the	 usurping	 vizier	 paying	 them	 for	 their
loyalty?
Suddenly	a	hand	closed	on	his	shoulder	and	Babur	tensed,	ready	to	tear	himself	free,	but	the	grip	was
like	iron.	Helpless,	he	was	swung	round	to	face	his	attacker.
‘Greetings.	I	had	not	looked	to	see	you	so	soon	in	Samarkand.	The	siege	is	not	yet	over.’
Babur	 gasped.	 ‘Baisanghar!’	 The	 last	 time	 he	 had	 seen	 the	 man	 had	 been	 in	 Ferghana	 when	 he	 had
presented	him	with	Timur’s	blood-smeared	ring.
‘You’ve	been	careless.	I’ve	been	following	you	for	the	last	thirty	minutes.’
Babur’s	mouth	was	too	dry	for	speech	and	he	looked	down.	What	he	saw	made	him	gasp	again.	Though
Baisanghar	was	still	holding	him	tightly	with	his	left	hand,	his	right	arm	hung	stiffly	by	his	side	and	ended
in	a	raw-looking	stump.
Baisanghar	had	followed	his	gaze.	‘The	penalty	for	obeying	your	uncle’s	final	command	and	bringing

you	Timur’s	ring.	I	was	lucky	to	keep	my	head,	but	the	grand	vizier	decided	he	needed	me	to	help	in	the
defence	of	Samarkand.’
As	he	tried	to	calm	his	racing	heart	and	looked	around	to	assess	what	chance	of	escape	there	might	be,
Babur	was	dismayed	to	see	a	group	of	soldiers	watching.	They	must	be	wondering	what	their	commander
had	to	say	to	a	grimy	peasant	boy.	If	he	tried	to	run,	they	would	be	on	him	in	a	second.	‘What	now?’	He
had	found	his	voice.
‘It	is	simple.	If	I	give	you	up	to	the	grand	vizier,	my	fortune	is	made.	I	can	take	my	ease	in	a	luxurious
palace	 where	 fountains	 flow	 with	 rosewater	 and	 beautiful	 houris	 fulfil	 my	 every	 whim.’	 Baisanghar’s
eyes	searched	his	face.	‘But	life	is	not	so	simple.	Your	uncle	was	a	good	ruler	and	warranted	my	loyalty
to	 his	 last	 command,	 whatever	 the	 price.	 The	 vizier	 has	 wounded	 my	 honour	 and	 my	 pride.	 If	 you	 will
promise	me	his	head,	I	will	give	you	Samarkand.’
Babur’s	 eyes	 burned.	 ‘You	 have	 my	 word.	 The	 word	 of	 a	 king	 in	 whose	 veins	 the	 blood	 of	 Timur
flows.’
‘Majesty.’	With	a	gesture	so	tiny	that	no	one	observing	them	would	have	noticed,	Baisanghar	lowered
his	head	in	submission.

	
	
	

Chapter	5
The	Kok	Saray
	

As	dusk	fell	Babur,	with	Wazir	Khan	at	his	side,	addressed	a	picked	band	of	his	men	who	were	ready	to
set	 out	 on	 foot	 from	 their	 main	 camp,	 bellies	 full,	 the	 blades	 of	 their	 weapons	 honed	 and	 oiled,	 their
leather-covered	 wooden	 shields	 strapped	 to	 their	 backs.	 First	 they	 would	 follow	 Babur’s	 footsteps	 of
three	nights	ago	along	the	stream,	but	then	wait	in	concealment	for	a	signal	to	enter	Samarkand	through	the
Chaharraha	Gate,	the	entrance	to	the	city	where	Baisanghar	commanded	the	guard	and	that	he	had	sworn
to	open	to	Babur.
‘My	brothers-in-arms,	tonight	we	go	to	meet	our	destiny.	Let	us	fill	our	hearts	with	warrior	spirit	and
summon	all	our	reserves	of	courage	–	not	only	the	physical	bravery	to	fight,	which	I	know	you	possess,
but	the	resolution	of	mind	to	move	quietly	along	the	stream	and	wait	silently	in	hiding	for	however	long	it
takes	until	the	signal	comes	for	us	to	attack.	Each	of	us	carries	the	lives	of	his	comrades	in	his	hands.	If
any	one	of	us	betrays	his	position	–	whether	through	impatience	or	foolishness	–	he	betrays	us	all.	Young
as	I	am,	I	know	I	can	play	my	part.	Will	you	swear	to	me	that	you	have	the	will	to	do	so,	too?’
The	immediate	response	was	a	chorus	of	‘Yes,	Majesty.’
Without	 wasting	 further	 words,	 Babur	 gave	 the	 command	 for	 the	 party	 to	 set	 off.	 They	 did	 so	 two
abreast	along	the	stream	bank	into	the	gathering	gloom.	Keeping	as	close	as	they	could	to	the	water,	they
took	 advantage	 of	 every	 bit	 of	 protection	 the	 reeds	 and	 feathery	 willows	 fringing	 its	 banks	 provided.
Suddenly,	when	they	had	been	going	a	quarter	of	an	hour	or	so,	one	of	the	leading	men	was	seized	by	a	fit
of	 coughing.	 To	 Babur	 his	 cough	 was	 as	 loud	 as	 the	 bark	 of	 any	 alarmed	 guard	 dog.	 But	 no	 sound	 or
movement	came	from	the	direction	of	Samarkand.	Babur	relaxed	once	more.	Then	the	man	coughed	again,
seemingly	even	louder,	and	continued	to	do	so	for	what	appeared	an	age	but	was	perhaps	just	a	minute.
Still	the	only	other	sound	was	the	persistent	whine	of	the	mosquitoes,	which	were	now	beginning	to	gorge
themselves	on	every	man’s	exposed	flesh.
‘I’ll	send	him	back,	Majesty,’	whispered	Wazir	Khan.
‘Good.’
Two	hours	after	leaving	the	camp,	Babur	recognised	the	point	near	the	Needlemaker’s	Gate	where	he
had	scrambled	off	towards	the	tunnel	to	make	his	reconnaissance	of	Samarkand.	Tonight,	however,	he	and
his	 men	 would	 continue	 along	 the	 stream.	 Flowing	 tranquilly	 in	 the	 moonlight,	 it	 would	 once	 more	 be
Babur’s	 ally	 as	 it	 meandered	 northwards,	 passing	 close,	 no	 more	 than	 two	 hundred	 yards,	 to	 the
Chaharraha	Gate.
Still	taking	advantage	of	its	protecting	reeds	and	willows,	Babur	and	his	men	reached	the	point	nearest
the	 gate	 without	 further	 alarms.	 After	 a	 brief	 consultation	 with	 Wazir	 Khan,	 Babur	 whispered	 the
command	for	the	men	to	conceal	themselves	in	the	reeds	until	the	moon	was	at	its	zenith	–	the	time	they
had	agreed	with	Baisanghar	he	would	open	the	gate.

Babur	shifted,	trying	to	get	more	comfortable.	It	was	difficult.	Mosquitoes	continued	to	plague	him	and	he
could	not	stop	himself	scratching	the	bites	raw.	Mud	seeped	and	squelched	beneath	his	squatting	form	but
at	least	the	thick	reeds	were	good	camouflage.	If	he’d	guessed	the	time	correctly,	from	what	he	could	see
of	the	movement	of	the	moon	and	stars	in	the	small	square	of	sky	directly	above	his	head,	it	must	be	about
ninety	minutes	since	they	had	concealed	themselves.
From	where	he	was	crouching,	though,	he	couldn’t	see	anything	like	enough	of	the	landscape	and	sky	to
be	certain	of	the	moon’s	position.	He	had	to	know	more	accurately	how	much	longer	there	was	to	wait.
He	raised	his	head	cautiously,	disregarding	Wazir	Khan’s	fatherly	insistence	that	he,	like	the	rest	of	the
men,	should	keep	it	down	and	leave	the	calculation	of	time	to	his	own	more	experienced	observation.	As
he	poked	his	head	warily	through	the	reeds	for	a	better	view,	the	chain-mail	shirt	that	Wazir	Khan	had	also
insisted	 he	 wear,	 but	 which	 was	 too	 big	 for	 him,	 twisted,	 and	 a	 fold	 of	 the	 overlapping	 metal	 circles
became	wedged	under	one	of	his	armpits,	pinching	him.	Babur	struggled	impatiently,	reaching	inside	his
clothes	and	trying	to	tug	the	shirt	down,	but	he	only	succeeded	in	making	matters	worse.
A	pair	of	teal	shot	squawking	out	of	the	reeds,	just	in	front	of	his	face.	They	must	have	been	alarmed	by
his	 contortions	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 rearrange	 his	 garments	 and	 equipment.	 He	 ducked	 down	 guiltily	 but	 no
sooner	 was	 he	 back	 among	 the	 reeds	 than	 he	 heard	 rustling	 just	 feet	 away	 and	 drawing	 nearer.	 Though
logic	told	him	it	could	only	be	one	of	his	own	men,	his	fingers	tightened	instinctively	on	the	eagle	hilt	of
his	father’s	sword,	Alamgir.	He	tensed,	ready	to	spring	up	and	fight	for	his	life.	The	noise	grew	louder
and	Wazir	Khan’s	mud-smeared	face	appeared	through	the	reeds	as	he	wriggled	towards	him	on	his	belly,
propelling	himself	with	his	elbows.	Babur	relaxed,	and	as	he	did	so	it	occurred	to	him	that	with	his	shield
on	his	back	and	lying	almost	flat,	Wazir	Khan	looked	like	an	ill-proportioned	tortoise.
‘Majesty,	it’s	time	to	move.	Shall	I	order	the	signal	to	be	given?’
Suppressing	a	smile,	Babur	nodded.
Wazir	Khan	slithered	away	again,	still	keeping	low.	Moments	later,	at	his	command,	a	blazing	arrow
arced	across	the	cloudless	sky,	its	fiery	trail	like	that	of	a	comet.	As	Babur	rose	to	his	feet	out	of	the	reeds
his	guts	lurched	and	he	found	his	legs	were	shaking	with	a	mixture	of	excitement	and	apprehension.	All
around	him,	his	men	were	appearing	from	their	hiding-places.
Wazir	Khan	was	at	his	side.	‘Now	we	will	know	whether	Baisanghar	is	a	man	of	his	word.’
‘He	is.’	Babur	was	sure	of	it,	but	Wazir	Khan	had	been	hard	to	convince,	worried	that	Babur,	young	and
untested,	had	been	deceived.
With	 Babur	 and	 Wazir	 Khan	 at	 their	 head,	 the	 warriors	 crept	 out	 of	 the	 reeds,	 formed	 up	 and	 made
swiftly	for	the	Chaharraha	Gate	over	the	marshy	ground,	their	leather	boots	occasionally	sticking	in	the
mud	and	their	breath	coming	softly.	As	he	approached,	Babur	could	see	that	the	gate	was	smaller	than	the
soaring	Turquoise	Gate	or	even	the	Needlemaker’s	Gate.	The	unadorned,	stubby	stone	towers	on	either
side	had	been	built	for	strength,	not	grace,	and	Babur	could	see	the	heavy	metal	grille	of	the	gate	itself
barring	the	narrow	passage	into	the	city.	It	seemed	to	grin	with	gap-toothed	malevolence	at	him.
Eyes	flicking	from	side	to	side,	searching	for	any	sign	of	movement,	Babur	realised	there	was	nothing	–
not	even	a	light	in	the	chamber	over	the	gate	where	Baisanghar	should	be	giving	the	order	to	winch	up	the
grille.	What	should	he	do	if	nothing	happened?	Perhaps	it	had	all	been	just	a	trick.	Or	perhaps	the	plot	had
been	betrayed	and	even	now	Baisanghar	was	being	tortured	in	some	stinking	dungeon	to	make	him	scream
out	their	plans.
Babur	forced	himself	to	think	coolly.	What	were	his	options?	But	in	his	heart	he	knew	he	had	only	one.
They	 must	 go	 on.	 Even	 now,	 triggered	 by	 the	 flight	 of	 the	 burning	 arrow,	 four	 hundred	 of	 his	 warriors
would	be	retracing	his	journey	of	three	nights	ago	and	dropping	down	into	the	dank,	narrow	tunnel	that
had	led	him	into	the	city.	He	could	not	abandon	them.	Whatever	happened,	he	would	lead	his	men	in	an

assault	on	the	gate.
But	even	as	these	thoughts	jostled	in	his	mind,	Babur	saw	a	figure	appear	on	the	wall	to	the	right	of	the
gate,	holding	a	burning	torch,	which	he	waved	slowly	and	deliberately	from	side	to	side.	Almost	at	once
Babur	heard	the	raw,	grating	noise	of	a	great	wheel	being	turned.	The	metal	grille	shuddered,	then	slowly
began	to	rise.	He	shot	Wazir	Khan	a	grin	of	triumph,	then	gave	the	low,	whooping	call	that	was	the	signal
to	 attack.	 He	 heard	 it	 repeated	 ten,	 a	 hundred	 times	 as	 his	 men	 took	 it	 up.	 Soft	 as	 it	 was,	 it	 seemed	 to
swell,	lifting	him	up	and	impelling	him	forward.
His	father’s	sword	in	his	right	hand,	dagger	in	his	left,	Babur	ran	the	short	remaining	distance	to	the
gate.	 The	 grille	 was	 already	 a	 third	 of	 the	 way	 up.	 With	 his	 men	 surging	 round	 him,	 he	 flung	 himself
beneath	it,	curling	into	a	ball	to	roll	under	its	sharp	prongs.	Uncoiling	himself	he	leaped	to	his	feet	and
peered	into	the	darkness,	every	nerve	tense	as	he	listened	for	the	air	to	move	as	an	arrow	took	flight	or	a
throwing	 axe	 whirled	 towards	 him.	 But	 there	 was	 only	 the	 sound	 of	 feet	 running	 down	 the	 stone	 stairs
from	 the	 gatehouse.	 It	 was	 Baisanghar,	 face	 grim.	 ‘Welcome.	 I	 have	 kept	 my	 word.’	 He	 knelt	 briefly
before	Babur.	‘	We	must	be	quick.	There	are	spies	everywhere	–	even	now	we	will	be	being	watched	and
the	alarm	may	sound	at	any	moment.	Twenty	of	my	men	are	holding	this	gate	but	the	rest	are	waiting	near
the	Kok	Saray.’	He	gestured	up	the	dark	lane	leading	into	the	city.	‘Come.’
As	Baisanghar	finished	speaking,	ahead,	high	on	the	battlements	of	the	Kok	Saray	within	the	walls	of
the	citadel,	spurts	of	orange	light	were	suddenly	piercing	the	darkness	–	torches.	The	garrison	had	been
alerted	to	their	presence.	The	wailing	of	a	horn	and	the	harsh	shouts	of	officers	as	they	roused	their	men
confirmed	 that	 they	 had	 lost	 the	 advantage	 of	 surprise.	 Babur	 did	 not	 hesitate.	 Raising	 his	 sword,	 he
yelled	the	battle	cry	of	his	people	–	‘Ferghana.’	Blood	pounding	in	his	ears,	he	charged	forward.
The	lane	was	lined	with	tall,	thin,	mud-brick	houses	whose	doors	were	no	doubt	being	barred.	For	a
second	 Babur	 thought	 of	 the	 families	 cowering	 behind	 them,	 praying	 the	 storm	 would	 pass	 over	 them.
They	were	not	to	know	that	he	had	ordered	there	was	to	be	no	looting	or	killing	of	civilians.	Though	his
enemies	would	pay	in	full,	the	beginning	of	his	reign	over	Samarkand	would	not	be	defiled	with	the	blood
of	its	innocent	citizens.
‘Down	 here,	 Majesty.’	 Baisanghar	 grabbed	 Babur’s	 arm	 and	 jerked	 him	 towards	 a	 narrow	 passage
winding	 off	 to	 the	 left.	 Thrown	 off	 balance	 Babur	 staggered	 and	 almost	 slipped.	 For	 a	 split	 second	 he
glanced	at	Wazir	Khan,	close	beside	him.	The	passage	was	high	-walled	and	very	cramped.	One	man,	or
at	very	best	two,	could	pass	down	it	abreast	–	a	perfect	place	for	an	ambush.	Who	or	what	might	not	be
waiting	for	them	down	there	in	the	murk?
‘It’s	a	short-cut	through	to	the	citadel.’	Baisanghar’s	voice	was	sharp	and	urgent.
Babur	searched	the	man’s	face.	He	knew	that,	despite	his	youth,	his	men	were	beginning	to	look	to	him
for	 leadership.	 Now	 was	 no	 time	 to	 hesitate,	 with	 the	 shouts	 of	 their	 enemies	 growing	 ever	 closer.	 He
trusted	Baisanghar,	which	made	his	decision	easy.	Calling	to	his	warriors	to	follow	and	with	Wazir	Khan
at	his	side,	he	turned	down	the	passage	behind	Baisanghar.	Babur	was	surprised	that	he	felt	no	fear	now
that	the	action	was	under	way,	only	exhilaration.	Would	every	battle	feel	like	this?	Suddenly,	from	away
to	the	east,	he	heard	a	great	roar.	His	men	must	be	disgorging	from	the	tunnel	and	racing	into	the	heart	of
the	city.	That	should	keep	the	grand	vizier’s	soldiers	occupied.
The	passage	twisted	sharply	to	the	right,	then	ended	abruptly.	Looking	about	him	in	the	gloom,	Babur
saw	he	was	in	a	small	square,	one	side	of	which,	the	one	directly	opposite,	was	bounded	by	what	looked
like	 the	 high	 walls	 of	 Timur’s	 citadel.	 Recalling	 his	 previous	 visit	 and	 the	 plans	 he	 had	 studied,	 he
realised	they	must	be	on	its	southern	side.	Yes,	he	was	right	–	within	the	walls	and	just	a	few	hundred
yards	onward,	towards	the	east,	he	could	make	out	the	sharp-toothed	battlements	of	the	Kok	Saray	itself.
Baisanghar	had	guided	them	well.	Even	better,	Babur	could	see	no	defenders	on	the	walls	directly	above.

Presumably	they	were	not	expecting	their	enemy	to	steal	up	on	them	here.
Even	so,	following	the	example	of	Baisanghar	and	Wazir	Khan,	Babur	quickly	crossed	the	square	and
flattened	himself	against	the	citadel	wall.	As	his	men	emerged	from	the	passage,	he	signalled	to	them	to
do	likewise.	They	moved	quickly,	obeying	him	without	hesitation.	Baisanghar	gave	a	low	call	and	darkcloaked,	dome-helmeted	figures	moved	quickly	from	where	they	had	been	waiting,	concealed	behind	the
steaming	 midden	 that	 occupied	 the	 western	 corner	 of	 the	 square.	 Baisanghar’s	 guards.	 They	 gathered
silently	round	their	commander.
‘Majesty,	the	citadel	wall	is	lowest	near	an	old	blocked-up	doorway	on	its	eastern	side,	just	round	the
corner,’	Baisanghar	whispered.	‘That	is	where	we	should	climb	in.	My	men	have	brought	ladders	and	I
will	 post	 archers	 to	 provide	 us	 with	 cover.’	 Babur	 and	 Wazir	 Khan	 nodded	 agreement.	 Keeping	 very
close	to	the	wall	and	with	Baisanghar	leading	the	way,	the	party	edged	towards	the	corner	of	the	citadel
wall.	Cautiously,	Baisanghar	peered	round,	then	stepping	back,	gestured	to	Babur	and	Wazir	Khan	to	do
the	same.
A	swift	glance	confirmed	that	all	was	quiet.	The	doorway	was	only	some	thirty	yards	ahead.	Suddenly
the	 excitement	 and	 tension	 became	 too	 much	 for	 Babur.	 Dodging	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 restraining	 arm,	 he	 ran
towards	the	door,	yelling	to	the	others	to	follow	him.	He	did	not	even	remember	to	keep	in	the	shadow	of
the	 wall	 and	 immediately	 he	 heard	 the	 swoosh	 of	 one	 arrow,	 then	 another,	 as	 archers	 arrived	 on	 the
battlements	 above,	 no	 doubt	 alerted	 by	 his	 wild	 shouts.	 A	 long-shafted	 arrow	 grazed	 his	 cheek,	 before
slamming	into	the	ground	behind	him.	The	stinging	pain	didn’t	matter.	Nothing	did,	except	the	exhilaration
of	this	moment.	He	hurtled	on	towards	the	doorway.	Somehow	reaching	it	unscathed,	he	pressed	his	body
against	 the	 stones	 with	 which	 it	 was	 blocked,	 hoping	 that	 the	 overhanging	 lintel	 would	 provide	 some
cover.	 Glancing	 around	 he	 noticed	 a	 crouching	 tiger,	 the	 emblem	 of	 Samarkand,	 carved	 into	 the	 stone
frame	beside	him,	lips	curled	in	a	snarl,	ears	flat	against	its	head.
Baisanghar’s	archers	were	now	in	place,	firing	back	at	the	defenders	on	the	walls	above.	Babur	could
feel	warm	liquid	dripping	down	his	forehead	and	into	his	eyes.	Touching	it	with	his	fingers	he	realised	it
was	blood,	but	not	his	own.	Looking	up,	he	saw,	high	above,	a	man	with	an	arrow	in	his	neck	leaning	over
the	wall.	As	his	hand	clutched	at	his	ripped	flesh,	he	overbalanced.	Seconds	later,	he	crashed	at	Babur’s
feet	with	a	soft	thud.	Spewing	blood	and	phlegm,	he	twitched	convulsively	for	a	few	moments	and	then
lay	still	amid	an	ever	spreading	pool	of	dark	blood.
Baisanghar’s	men	were	throwing	long	wooden	ladders	up	against	the	walls.	They	were	crudely	made
with	 rough	 wooden	 rungs	 lashed	 to	 the	 uprights	 with	 strips	 of	 leather,	 but	 they	 were	 suitable	 for	 the
purpose.	Men	were	already	climbing	them,	holding	on	with	one	hand	and	supporting	their	shields	above
their	heads	with	the	other	to	deflect	the	arrows	being	shot	from	above.
Babur’s	heart	was	still	pounding	and	he	wanted	to	be	into	the	action	quickly.	He	looked	around	for	a
different	way	up.	There	was	no	chance	of	unblocking	the	door.	At	first	glance,	the	stonework	of	the	walls
looked	smooth,	the	joints	fitting	neatly.	But	he	had	not	grown	up	amid	the	wild	mountains	and	ravines	of
Ferghana	for	nothing,	he	told	himself.	He	could	see	that	there	were	small	cracks	and	fissures	that	might
provide	hand-	and	footholds	to	someone	as	lithe	and	light	as	himself.	Slinging	his	father’s	precious	sword
across	 his	 back,	 Babur	 took	 a	 deep	 breath.	 Glancing	 round,	 he	 saw	 Wazir	 Khan	 watching	 him.	 His
expression	 was	 anxious.	 Babur	 turned	 quickly	 away	 and	 ran	 along	 the	 base	 of	 the	 wall	 to	 a	 point	 well
away	from	the	ladders,	dodging	an	arrow	as	he	did	so.
He	began	to	swarm	up,	his	hands	exploring	the	surface,	seeking	out	protruding	edges	and	corners	where
the	mortar	had	crumbled	or	the	mason’s	chisel	had	left	its	mark	–	anywhere	he	could	balance	a	toe	or	the
edge	 of	 a	 foot	 or	 thrust	 his	 fingers.	 He	 must	 keep	 his	 momentum	 going	 or	 he	 would	 fall,	 and	 his	 hands
reached	 up,	 searching	 for	 each	 new	 hold.	 Timur’s	 masons	 had	 built	 well	 –	 hadn’t	 he	 brought	 them

specially	 to	 Samarkand	 precisely	 because	 they	 were	 such	 good	 craftsmen?	 Too	 good,	 perhaps,	 Babur
thought	 as	 suddenly,	 twenty	 feet	 above	 the	 ground,	 his	 feet	 were	 spinning	 in	 empty	 air	 and	 he	 felt	 his
fingernails	cracking	as	he	struggled	to	cling	on	with	his	hands	alone.
Mouth	dry	and	dusty	as	the	stone	he	was	trying	to	hang	on	to,	Babur	flailed	about,	kicking	out	wildly	to
right	 and	 left	 as	 he	 sought	 a	 purchase	 for	 his	 feet	 but	 meeting	 only	 smooth	 stone.	 His	 protesting	 arms
burned	as	they	took	his	full	weight.	Then,	just	when	he	felt	he	must	let	go	and	tumble	down,	he	felt	his
right	foot	nudge	something	soft	–	a	tussock	of	coarse	grass	that	must	have	seeded	itself	deep	in	one	of	the
cracks	between	the	stones.	Gasping	with	relief,	Babur	pushed	his	right	foot	on	it	to	test	its	strength	and	as
it	took	some	of	his	weight	felt	the	pain	in	his	arms	subside.
For	a	moment	he	closed	his	eyes.	He	felt	like	an	insect,	tiny,	vulnerable	and	exposed,	but	at	least	he
could	rest	for	a	second.	Opening	his	eyes	again	and	looking	up	through	his	tumbled	hair,	he	saw	the	top	of
the	 wall	 was	 tantalisingly	 near	 –	 perhaps	 no	 more	 than	 seven	 or	 eight	 feet	 above	 him.	 Cautiously,	 he
stretched	up	an	exploratory	right	hand	and	almost	laughed	out	loud	as	it	found	a	rough,	protruding	edge	he
could	grip	about	two	feet	above	his	head.	Then,	still	keeping	his	right	foot	on	the	clump	of	grass	that	had
saved	him,	he	bent	his	left	leg	and	probed	upwards	with	his	foot.	Again	he	found	a	hold	–	not	much	of	one
–	 just	 a	 narrow,	 diagonal	 crack	 in	 one	 of	 the	 stone	 blocks,	 but	 enough.	 With	 one	 last	 great	 effort	 he
propelled	himself	upward,	reaching	for	the	top	of	the	wall	and	praying	he	wasn’t	about	to	feel	the	slash	of
a	blade	across	his	knuckles.
Heaving	himself	over	the	low	parapet	on	to	the	broad	top	of	the	wall,	the	stone	worn	smooth	by	the	feet
of	many	sentries,	Babur	looked	round	to	find	to	his	amazement	he	was	among	the	first	to	reach	it.	He	felt
he	had	been	climbing	for	ever,	but	within	moments	all	around	him	many	more	of	his	men,	led	by	Wazir
Khan	and	grunting	with	the	effort,	were	dropping	from	their	ladders.
The	defenders,	it	seemed,	had	fled.	Stepping	back	and	wiping	the	sweat	from	his	face,	Babur	tripped
over	a	handsome,	silver-bound	shield	that	a	fleeing	soldier	had	thrown	aside.	He	stooped	to	pick	it	up	but
a	noise	behind	him	made	him	twist	around.	Less	cowardly	soldiers	of	Samarkand	were	rushing	up	a	steep
staircase	 leading	 from	 the	 courtyard	 beneath	 the	 inner	 side	 of	 the	 wall.	 The	 grand	 vizier’s	 personal
bodyguard,	Babur	guessed,	noting	the	bright	green	sashes	of	Samarkand	round	their	waists	and	the	green
pennants	 fluttering	 at	 the	 ends	 of	 their	 spears.	 With	 a	 yell,	 Babur	 charged	 towards	 them,	 knowing	 that
Wazir	Khan	and	his	men	would	be	with	him,	and	found	himself	locked	in	a	crowd	of	heaving,	swearing,
stabbing	 men.	 Even	 though	 the	 top	 of	 the	 wall	 was	 broad	 –	 perhaps	 ten	 feet	 wide	 –	 men	 were	 soon
tumbling	 from	 either	 side	 of	 it,	 some	 wounded,	 some	 simply	 pushed	 over	 the	 parapet	 by	 stronger
opponents.	The	stench	of	hot,	sour	sweat	filled	his	nostrils.	For	ever	afterwards	it	would	be	for	him	the
scent	of	battle.
A	 giant	 of	 a	 man	 with	 a	 long	 black	 beard	 tinged	 with	 grey	 singled	 Babur	 out,	 a	 voracious	 sneer
spreading	over	his	fleshy	face	as	he	took	in	Babur’s	slight	stature	and	his	youth.	Babur	had	seen	just	such
a	look	on	the	face	of	a	cat	about	to	devour	a	mouse	and	the	utter	disrespect	stung	him.	Wazir	Khan	had
insisted	that	Babur	 should	 wear	 nothing	 to	 identify	 him	 as	 Ferghana’s	 king	 but	 he	 would	 still	 prove	 his
pedigree	to	this	arrogant,	fat	pig.
‘Old	man,	you	should	be	at	home,	dribbling	by	the	fire	and	calling	for	your	servants	to	mop	up	your
leaking	piss.’
The	 stout	 warrior	 looked	 startled	 for	 a	 moment	 but	 then,	 as	 he	 took	 in	 what	 Babur	 had	 said,	 rage
suffused	his	features.	He	advanced	towards	Babur,	balancing	his	spear	in	his	large,	leathery	hands.	‘You
cheeky	 little	 rat,	 I’ll	 shut	 you	 up.’	 In	 a	 move	 so	 sudden	 that	 Babur	 hardly	 had	 time	 to	 register	 it,	 he
reversed	his	spear	and	jammed	the	blunt	end	into	the	pit	of	Babur’s	stomach.
Babur	felt	his	feet	lift	off	the	ground	as	the	impact	flung	him	backwards.	As	his	arms	flailed,	he	was

afraid	the	blow	would	hurl	him	off	the	wall	but	instead	he	felt	his	head	snap	back	as	it	hit	the	low	stone
parapet.	 For	 a	 second	 his	 world	 dissolved	 into	 stars,	 not	 the	 pure,	 silvery	 starlight	 he’d	 gazed	 up	 at
earlier	from	the	reeds	but	a	chaos	of	bright,	jagged	shapes	tinged	with	red	which	seemed	to	ooze	blood.
His	mouth	was	full	of	salty	fluid	and	instinctively	he	spat	it	out.	Yet	still	he	couldn’t	breathe	–	the	blow
had	crushed	the	air	out	of	him.
The	bearded	man	was	advancing	on	him	again.	‘That	was	just	for	starters.	You’ll	suffer	more	for	that
sneer	before	you	die,’	he	spat	and	simultaneously	jabbed	at	Babur’s	groin	with	his	spear.	Just	in	time,	and
still	 struggling	 for	 breath,	 Babur	 rolled	 sideways	 and	 the	 spearhead	 hit	 the	 stone,	 striking	 sparks.	 His
opponent	cursed.	For	all	his	weight,	he	was	surprisingly	light	on	his	feet.	Moving	like	a	determined	great
bear,	he	lunged	at	Babur,	who,	half	bent,	was	clutching	his	winded	and	aching	belly	with	one	hand	while
still	 holding	 his	 sword	 in	 the	 other.	 His	 breath	 was	 coming	 just	 a	 little	 more	 easily	 now	 and	 he	 took
comfort	from	it.
‘Well,	 rat	 spawn	 –	 soon	 you’ll	 be	 on	 the	 dung	 heap	 with	 the	 rest	 of	 your	 kind,’	 the	 man	 said,
repositioning	his	spear	so	that	the	tip	was	pointed	directly	towards	Babur’s	face.	Babur	stared	at	it,	half
hypnotised	 by	 the	 diamond	 bright,	 coldly	 gleaming	 point.	 For	 a	 moment,	 he	 felt	 strangely	 paralysed,
powerless	to	react,	but	as	the	warrior	thrust	his	spear	at	him	again,	he	knew	instinctively	what	he	must	do.
Summoning	 all	 his	 agility	 and	 his	 speed	 he	 flung	 himself	 to	 the	 ground	 and	 rolled	 not	 away	 from	 his
assailant	 but	 towards	 him,	 underneath	 his	 jabbing	 spear.	 As	 his	 body	 crashed	 into	 the	 man’s	 legs,	 he
slashed	at	the	back	of	one	of	his	knees	with	his	long-bladed	dagger,	severing	the	tendons.	With	a	howl,	his
opponent	collapsed	sideways,	and	blood	gushed	from	the	wound.	Babur	scrambled	to	his	feet	and	struck
again.	This	time	he	aimed	for	the	man’s	ribs,	at	a	spot	just	below	his	left	armpit	that	the	breastplate	didn’t
cover.	He	felt	his	blade	penetrate	the	tough	muscle	and	thick	cartilage,	then	slide	between	the	man’s	ribs.
The	giant	gave	what	sounded	like	a	low	sigh	and	slumped	forward.	As	Babur	pulled	out	his	dagger	blood
spurted	everywhere.	He	gazed,	fascinated,	at	the	first	man	he	had	killed	in	hand-to-hand	combat.
‘Majesty,	look	out!’	Wazir	Khan’s	shout	came	only	just	in	time.	Turning	and	dropping	back	to	his	knees,
Babur	thrust	wildly	at	another	attacker	who	had	been	about	to	bring	an	axe	biting	into	the	back	of	his	neck.
Suddenly	Babur	knew	fear	again.	What	an	idiot	to	allow	himself	to	be	taken	by	surprise	from	behind.	In
the	 nick	 of	 time,	 Wazir	 Khan	 kicked	 Babur’s	 new	 assailant	 to	 the	 ground	 and,	 with	 a	 single,	 powerful
sweep	of	his	curved	sword,	sent	his	head	skidding	across	the	battlements.
Grateful	 for	 the	 second	 chance	 that	 he	 knew	 so	 many	 inexperienced	 warriors	 did	 not	 live	 to	 enjoy,
Babur	was	already	back	on	his	feet	again,	dagger	and	sword	ready,	but	looking	around	he	saw	that	the
vizier’s	 guards	 had	 all	 been	 killed	 or	 fled.	 They	 lay	 in	 ones	 and	 twos,	 slumped	 over	 each	 other	 or
spreadeagled	on	the	stone	in	unnatural	postures,	their	once	bright	sashes	dark	with	blood.	Babur	caught
the	stench	of	spilled	guts	and	slashed	intestines.
‘Come.’	Baisanghar	was	beside	him,	blood	seeping	from	what	seemed	a	deep	wound	to	his	shoulder,
his	face	taut	with	pain.	Yet	he	gestured	insistently	to	the	crenellated	outline	of	the	Kok	Saray	just	a	few
hundred	 feet	 away.	 ‘That	 is	 where	 the	 grand	 vizier	 will	 be	 hiding	 –	 if	 I	 know	 him,	 he	 will	 have	 taken
refuge	in	the	women’s	quarters.’
Signalling	to	his	men	to	follow,	Babur	stumbled	after	Baisanghar	towards	the	staircase	leading	down
from	the	wall.	As	he	scrambled	over	fallen	bodies,	half-slipping	in	the	gore,	one	face	caught	his	 eye.	 It
belonged	to	a	youth	perhaps	no	older	than	him.	Drained	of	blood,	his	lips	were	drawn	back	over	the	gums
in	a	silent	scream	of	pain	and	his	large,	dark	but	unseeing	eyes	seemed	filled	with	fear	beneath	their	long
lashes.	 Babur	 shivered	 and	 looked	 quickly	 away.	 It	 could	 easily	 have	 been	 himself	 had	 it	 not	 been	 for
Wazir	Khan’s	warning	shout.
The	 citadel	 was	 quiet	 and	 still	 as	 Babur,	 Wazir	 Khan	 and	 their	 men	 followed	 Baisanghar	 across	 the

courtyard.	After	the	fight	on	the	wall	there	was	no	reason	for	them	to	keep	silent	–	their	presence	within
the	citadel	could	hardly	be	a	secret.	But	Babur’s	men	moved	as	quietly	and	stealthily	as	the	sheep-	and
cattle-rustlers	so	many	of	them	were.	Where	were	the	grand	vizier’s	remaining	guards	and	troops?	Babur
expected	a	rush	of	arrows	at	any	moment,	but	there	was	nothing.
As	they	stole	up	to	it,	the	four-storey	Kok	Saray	was	also	eerily	silent,	its	gleaming	brass	doors	with
their	dragon	handles	open	and	unguarded.	Timur’s	fabled	stronghold.	What	confidence	it	must	have	taken
to	 build	 something	 so	 magnificent.	 Its	 very	 stones	 exuded	 power	 and	 authority.	 Babur	 remembered	 his
father’s	sinister	stories.	‘All	of	Timur’s	offspring	who	raised	their	heads	and	sat	on	the	throne	sat	there.
All	who	lost	their	heads	in	quest	of	the	throne	lost	it	there.	To	say	“They	have	taken	the	prince	to	the	Kok
Saray”	meant	he	was	already	dead.’
Wazir	Khan	and	Baisanghar	were	conferring.	Impatient	to	enter,	Babur	joined	them.	‘Majesty,	we	must
be	cautious,’	Wazir	Khan	said	quickly,	seeing	Babur’s	eagerness.	‘This	may	be	a	trap.’	Babur	nodded.	He
was	right.	Only	a	careless	fool	would	rush	inside.	He	forced	himself	to	curb	the	impetuousness	that	had	so
nearly	cost	him	dear	when	he	had	run	for	the	blocked	doorway.	Nevertheless,	he	couldn’t	help	constantly
shifting	from	foot	to	foot	while	Wazir	Khan	ordered	six	of	his	men	to	take	torches	from	the	brackets	where
they	were	burning	and	enter	cautiously	to	check	for	signs	of	an	ambush.
After	what	seemed	an	age	to	Babur	but	was,	in	fact,	just	a	few	minutes,	they	returned,	signalling	that	all
seemed	 quiet.	 Babur’s	 heart	 leaped	 and	 he	 stepped	 inside,	 his	 men	 clustering	 behind	 him.	 Beyond	 the
brass	doors	they	found	a	cavernous,	vaulted	entrance	chamber	and	beyond	that,	straight	ahead,	a	flight	of
broad,	shallow	steps.	Slowly,	warily,	they	began	to	climb,	guided	by	flickering	torchlight,	eyes	straining
into	the	darkness	ahead.	Thirty	steps	brought	them	to	the	second	storey.	Ahead	rose	another	flight.	Babur’s
foot	was	already	on	its	first	step	when	he	heard	a	shout.
‘Majesty,	down,	get	down!’	Babur	ducked	as	a	spear	flung	out	of	the	darkness	above	hurtled	over	his
head,	so	close	that	he	felt	his	hair	stir.	The	next	moment,	two	dozen	more	of	the	grand	vizier’s	men	were
rushing	 down	 the	 stairs	 towards	 them.	 Babur	 found	 himself	 twisting	 and	 slashing.	 In	 the	 confusion	 his
dagger	was	of	more	use	than	his	sword.	He	darted	beneath	his	enemies’	shields,	stabbing	upwards	with
his	blade,	feeling	warm	blood	spurt	down	his	hands	and	arms	as	he	found	his	mark.	All	around	him	his
men,	swearing	and	grunting,	were	pushing	forward.
The	grand	vizier’s	troops	began	to	waver,	struggling	to	maintain	the	momentum	of	their	charge	down
the	stairs.	Soon	they	were	being	pushed	ever	backwards.	Suddenly	they	lost	discipline	and	began	fleeing
back	up,	slipping	and	crashing	on	the	steps	in	their	desperate	eagerness	to	get	away	and	not	to	have	to	die
in	 a	 lost	 cause.	 Babur’s	 men	 came	 after	 them,	 slashing	 and	 hacking	 at	 the	 forms	 disappearing	 up	 the
second	flight	of	stairs,	then	retreating	part-way	up	a	third.
In	the	rush,	Babur	slipped	on	an	uneven	step	and	slithering	sideways	fell.	One	of	his	advancing	men
was	so	close	behind	that	he	couldn’t	stop	himself	stumbling	over	Babur	and	in	the	process	standing	hard
on	 the	 small	 of	 his	 back,	 winding	 him	 once	 more.	 As	 the	 fight	 receded	 up	 the	 third	 staircase,	 Babur
scrambled	 painfully	 to	 his	 feet.	 For	 a	 moment	 he	 felt	 sick	 and	 found	 it	 hard	 to	 focus.	 Putting	 his	 hand
against	the	wall	he	steadied	himself	and	forced	himself	to	take	deep	breaths,	though	his	bruised	ribs	and
strained	stomach	muscles	made	it	painful.
‘Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan	was	rushing	down	the	stairs	towards	him.
‘Are	you	hurt?’
Babur	shook	his	head.	‘No,	I’m	fine.’
‘The	last	of	the	grand	vizier’s	men	–	those	we	did	not	kill	–	have	taken	refuge	at	the	top	of	the	building.
It’s	nearly	over.’	Wazir	Khan	allowed	himself	a	rare	smile	and	touched	Babur’s	shoulder.	‘Come.’
Just	then	came	shouts	from	below	and	the	sound	of	many	feet	pounding	the	stone	steps	towards	them.

Babur	 swung	 round	 to	 meet	 the	 new	 menace.	 But	 surging	 up	 the	 stairs	 from	 the	 dark	 shadows,	 he
recognised	 some	 of	 the	 men	 who	 had	 come	 through	 the	 tunnel	 and,	 at	 their	 head,	 Ali	 Mazid	 Beg,	 the
muscular	chieftain	from	the	west	of	Ferghana	he	and	Wazir	Khan	had	chosen	to	lead	them.
‘Majesty,	 the	 citadel	 and	 the	 fortress	 are	 ours	 –	 as	 is	 the	 city.’	 Ali	 Mazid	 Beg	 looked	 exhausted	 but
beneath	the	filth	and	sweat	his	almond-eyed	face	beamed	triumph.
‘You	have	done	well.’
‘Majesty.’	Though	he	was	still	out	of	breath,	Ali	Mazid	Beg’s	voice	was	full	of	pride	at	what	he	and	his
troops	had	achieved.
‘Have	you	or	your	men	seen	the	grand	vizier?’
Ali	Mazid	Beg	shook	his	head	regretfully.
‘Then	it	must	be	as	Baisanghar	thought.	He	is	hiding	among	his	women,	here	in	the	Kok	Saray,	unless	he
has	escaped	from	the	city.’
‘Where	would	he	go,	Majesty?	Who	would	hide	him?’	Wazir	Khan	asked.
With	 Wazir	 Khan	 at	 his	 side	 Babur	 climbed	 the	 remaining	 steps	 to	 the	 top	 storey	 of	 the	 Kok	 Saray.
Directly	opposite	the	staircase,	through	a	crowd	of	his	jubilant	warriors,	he	could	see	a	pair	of	shining
silver	doors	inlaid	with	turquoises.
‘The	women’s	quarters?’	Babur	asked.
Baisanghar	nodded.
In	 his	 mind’s	 eye,	 Babur	 suddenly	 pictured	 his	 sister	 Khanzada	 wide-eyed	 with	 fear.	 How	 would	 he
feel	if	she	was	hiding	behind	such	a	door,	defenceless	before	warriors	high	on	victory?	He	turned	to	the
men	clustered	around	him.	‘The	women	are	not	to	be	touched.	I	come	to	Samarkand	as	its	new	king,	not	as
a	marauder	in	the	night.’
He	 read	 angry	 disappointment	 on	 many	 of	 the	 men’s	 flushed	 faces.	 They’d	 probably	 believe	 he’d
spoken	 as	 he	 had	 because	 he	 was	 still	 a	 boy	 with	 an	 incomplete	 understanding	 of	 a	 man’s	 needs	 and
frustrations.	 But	 they	 could	 think	 what	 they	 liked.	 Glancing	 at	 Wazir	 Khan	 he	 saw	 approval	 on	 his
commander’s	face	and	felt	he’d	passed	yet	another	test.
The	silver	doors	shuddered	under	the	impact	of	a	battering	ram	carried	up	from	one	of	the	courtyards
below	 and	 the	 turquoises	 shattered,	 bright	 shards	 falling	 to	 the	 floor.	 Yet	 the	 doors	 held.	 Beneath	 the
shining	silver,	the	wood	must	be	thick	and	the	bolts	strong,	Babur	thought	as,	for	the	fourth	time,	his	men
hurled	 the	 metal-tipped	 tree	 trunk	 at	 them.	 But	 at	 last	 the	 doors’	 silver	 covering	 buckled	 and	 the	 wood
beneath	splintered.	Two	warriors	used	their	axes	to	hack	a	hole	big	enough	for	a	man	to	enter.
For	a	few	seconds	Babur	and	his	men	waited,	fingering	their	weapons.	He	was	sure	that	at	any	moment
they	 would	 hear	 the	 cry	 of	 guards	 rushing	 to	 defend	 the	 harem	 or	 be	 forced	 back	 from	 the	 opening	 by
arrows	fired	from	within.	Instead	the	only	response	was	silence	and	the	rich,	heavy	scent	of	sandalwood,
which	reminded	him	of	the	last	time	he	had	sat	with	his	mother.	It	curled	around	them,	mingling	with	the
odour	of	their	sweat.
Signalling	to	his	men	to	keep	silent,	Babur	moved	towards	the	opening,	again	determined	to	be	the	first
inside.	‘No,	Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan’s	restraining	hand	gripped	him	hard.	‘Let	me	enter	first.’
I	 owe	 him	 this,	 Babur	 thought.	 Hiding	 his	 disappointment,	 he	 watched	 Wazir	 Khan	 and	 two	 of	 his
guards	 ease	 themselves	 cautiously	 through,	 weapons	 ready.	 A	 few	 moments	 later	 he	 heard	 Wazir	 Khan
say,	‘You	may	enter,	Majesty.’
Babur	climbed	through	the	shattered	door	and	stepped	on	to	rugs	of	a	velvet	softness	he	had	never	felt
before.	The	carpets	of	Ferghana	were	like	worn	blankets	in	comparison.
Wazir	 Khan	 signalled	 to	 him	 to	 be	 wary.	 As	 the	 rest	 of	 his	 men	 pushed	 through	 behind	 him,	 Babur
moved	 forward,	 scanning	 the	 corners	 of	 the	 large	 chamber,	 alert	 for	 any	 movement.	 The	 chamber	 was

well	 lit	 by	 hundreds	 of	 candles	 burning	 in	 mirrored	 niches.	 The	 amber	 light	 played	 over	 woven	 wall
hangings	 depicting	 tulips,	 irises	 and	 other	 flowers	 of	 Samarkand,	 and	 plump	 cushions	 of	 velvet	 or
shimmering	 satin.	 Six	 smaller	 silver	 doors,	 three	 on	 each	 side,	 led	 to	 what	 Babur	 guessed	 were	 the
women’s	private	rooms.	Ahead	another	door	was	covered	with	gold	leaf	into	which	was	etched	the	tiger
of	Samarkand.
Feeling	his	men’s	eyes	upon	him	once	more,	Babur	cleared	his	throat.	‘Vizier!’	he	shouted	towards	the
golden	door,	his	voice	young,	but	firm	and	clear.	‘You	cannot	save	yourself	but	you	can	at	least	make	your
death	quick	and	honourable.’	He	thought	he	detected	a	fumbling	sound	from	behind	the	door	but	then	all
was	quiet	again.	‘Vizier,	have	you	no	dignity	or	shame?’	Babur	persisted.
This	time	there	was	the	unmistakable	sound	of	a	scuffle	and	voices	raised	in	anger.	Suddenly	the	golden
door	swung	open	to	reveal	two	of	the	grand	vizier’s	bodyguards,	one	with	a	sabre	slash	across	his	cheek,
dragging	their	protesting	master	by	his	arms,	his	bright	green	brocade	coat	billowing	behind	him.	Without
ceremony	they	hurled	him	at	Babur’s	feet,	then	knelt	before	him	themselves	in	subjection.	Other	guards,
following	 nervously,	 also	 prostrated	 themselves.	 Babur	 gazed	 at	 the	 scene	 with	 contempt.	 ‘Baisanghar,
disarm	them.’
As	Baisanghar’s	men	went	briskly	to	work,	a	young	woman	in	pale	blue	silk	darted	through	the	golden
door,	 deftly	 evaded	 Baisanghar’s	 men	 and	 ran	 to	 the	 grand	 vizier.	 Falling	 to	 her	 knees	 beside	 him,	 she
tried	to	put	her	arms	round	him	but,	with	an	oath,	he	pushed	her	slim	form	away	violently.	After	regaining
her	balance,	the	girl	looked	up	at	Babur.	He	saw	an	oval	face	and	eyes	that,	though	puffy	with	tears,	were
still	 beautiful.	 ‘Let	 my	 father	 live.	 He	 is	 an	 old	 man.’	 She	 spoke	 without	 fear	 though	 confronted	 by	 a
crowd	 of	 battle-stained	 warriors	 from	 whom	 she	 must	 know	 she	 could	 expect	 little	 sympathy	 or	 even
mercy.
‘He	 has	 no	 right	 to	 live.	 His	 ambition	 exceeded	 his	 breeding,’	 Babur	 replied	 curtly.	 ‘Where	 are	 the
other	women?’
The	girl	hesitated	then	said,	‘In	their	rooms.’	She	gestured	towards	the	six	small	doors.	Babur	nodded
to	Wazir	Khan.	‘Search	them.	Make	sure	no	soldiers	are	hiding	there.	Then	lock	the	women	in	until	we
have	time	to	deal	with	them.’	Wazir	Khan	quickly	detailed	groups	of	soldiers	to	break	down	the	doors.
Almost	at	once	Babur	heard	wails	of	dismay	and	screams	of	protest	from	deep	within	the	harem,	but	he
knew	his	orders	would	be	obeyed.	He	could	not	prevent	the	women	being	frightened	but	they	would	not
be	violated.
The	vizier’s	daughter	was	still	looking	directly	at	him,	a	challenging	expression	in	her	chestnut	eyes.
He	turned	away	from	her	accusing	stare.	‘Take	her	to	her	private	quarters	and	lock	her	in	also.’	He	had	no
intention	of	sparing	the	vizier	but	found	he	wanted	to	save	the	young	woman	from	witnessing	her	father’s
end.	Before	a	soldier	could	take	hold	of	her,	she	rose	of	her	own	accord	and	disappeared	through	one	of
the	doors,	her	head	held	high	on	her	slender	neck,	without	any	final	entreaty	or	even	a	backward	glance.
Babur	stared	after	her,	wondering	what	it	had	cost	her	to	show	such	dignity.
‘Well,	vizier,	it	seems	your	daughter	is	braver	and	more	loyal	than	your	bodyguard.	You	do	not	deserve
such	 devotion.’	 Babur	 realised	 that	 he	 felt	 angry	 for	 the	 girl	 about	 the	 way	 her	 father	 had	 publicly
humiliated	her	by	pushing	her	away.
‘You	 have	 no	 right	 to	 the	 throne	 of	 Samarkand.’	 The	 grand	 vizier	 had	 dragged	 himself	 to	 a	 sitting
position	and	was	looking	at	Babur	with	a	malevolent	expression	on	his	pockmarked,	square-jawed	face,
seemingly	unconcerned	that	he	faced	inevitable	death.
‘I	am	of	Timur’s	blood,	the	nephew	of	the	last	king.	Who	has	greater	claim?’
The	 grand	 vizier	 narrowed	 his	 bloodshot	 eyes.	 ‘You	 may	 think	 you	 have	 taken	 Samarkand	 but	 you’ll
never	hold	it,’	he	sneered.	‘Ponder	that,	dregs	of	the	mountains.	Go	back	to	Ferghana	and	your	life	among

the	stinking	sheep.	Perhaps	one	of	them	would	make	you	a	good	wife	–	I’ve	heard	your	people	are	not
particular	.	.	.’
‘Enough!’	 Babur	 was	 shaking	 with	 what	 he	 recognised	 as	 adolescent	 fury	 but	 hoped	 his	 men	 would
interpret	as	kingly	rage.	‘Baisanghar,’	he	rapped.
The	captain	stepped	towards	him.	‘Majesty?’
‘As	 well	 as	 usurping	 a	 throne,	 this	 man	 did	 you	 a	 shameful	 wrong	 because	 you	 followed	 your	 true
king’s	last	command.’	Babur	saw	Baisanghar	glance	down	to	where	his	right	hand	should	have	been.	‘You
shall	have	the	task	of	despatching	this	wretch	to	whatever	awaits	him	in	the	next	world.	Dispose	of	him	in
the	courtyard	below	and	make	his	end	quick	out	of	respect	for	his	daughter’s	bravery.	Then	hang	his	body
in	chains	above	the	Turquoise	Gate	so	the	people	can	see	how	I	have	punished	the	man	whose	avarice	and
ambition	brought	them	such	hardship	and	want.	His	bodyguard	may	live,	provided	they	swear	allegiance
to	me	as	their	king.’
As	 Baisanghar’s	 men	 dragged	 the	 vizier	 away,	 Babur	 suddenly	 felt	 deeply	 weary.	 For	 a	 moment	 he
closed	his	eyes	and	stooped	to	run	his	fingers	over	the	silkily	luxurious	carpet	that	tomorrow	he	would
order	rolled	up	and	sent	to	his	mother	as	a	gift.	‘Samarkand,’	he	whispered	to	himself.	‘It	is	mine.’

	
	
	

Chapter	6
One	Hundred	Days
	

The	Turquoise	Gate	sparkled	as	the	bright	light	reflected	off	the	high	glaze	of	its	blue,	green	and	gold
tiles.	 Babur	 felt	 as	 if	 he	 was	 riding	 into	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 sun	 as	 he	 approached	 the	 gate	 to	 make	 his
ceremonial	entrance	into	Samarkand.	His	green	silk	robes	flowed	around	him,	stirring	in	the	light	breeze.
Timur’s	 golden	 ring,	 with	 its	 snarling	 tiger,	 gleamed	 on	 his	 finger,	 and	 the	 necklace	 of	 uncut	 emeralds
around	his	neck	rose	and	fell	with	his	breathing.	Conscious	that	thousands	of	eyes	would	be	watching	him,
he	forced	himself	to	look	stern,	though	he	felt	like	throwing	back	his	head,	filling	his	lungs	and	yelling	his
triumph	to	the	skies.
Behind	him	rode	his	chiefs	and	their	men.	From	the	motley	collection	of	tribesmen	who	had	ridden	with
him	 from	 Ferghana,	 Wazir	 Khan	 had	 fashioned,	 in	 just	 two	 days,	 an	 army	 to	 impress	 and	 awe	 as	 it
processed	through	the	city.	The	chambers	of	the	Kok	Saray	had	yielded	many	riches	in	which	to	dress	his
rough,	nomadic	warriors	from	engraved	helmets	and	cuirasses	to	bright	silks	hoarded	by	the	grand	vizier
while	his	people	lived	impoverished.
He	 would	 bring	 prosperity	 back	 to	 this	 great	 city,	 Babur	 vowed	 as,	 to	 a	 chorus	 of	 trumpets	 and	 the
echoing	boom	of	taut-skinned	kettle-drums,	he	passed	beneath	the	gate	above	which	the	vizier’s	headless
body	dangled,	already	blackening	in	the	sun,	in	its	iron	cage.	As	he	moved	onward	he	could	see	before
him	 the	 city’s	 blue	 domes	 and	 minarets.	 Soon	 he	 was	 passing	 one	 of	 the	 great	 markets	 with	 walled
caravanserais	 on	 either	 side	 to	 accommodate	 travelling	 merchants.	 His	 father	 had	 spoken	 often	 of	 the
wealthy	 caravan	 trains	 of	 Timur’s	 day	 –	 the	 lines	 of	 swaying,	 snorting	 camels	 and	 fast-trotting	 mules
carrying	furs,	leather	and	fine	cloth	from	the	west,	brocades,	china	and	pungent	musk	from	the	east,	and,
from	distant	lands	across	the	Indus,	fragrant	nutmeg,	cloves	and	cinnamon,	as	well	as	bright	gems.
The	crowds	along	the	streets	were	restrained	but	not	hostile.	Babur	could	feel	their	curiosity	as	he	rode
into	the	vast	Registan	Square	where,	beneath	striped	green	silk	awnings,	was	a	marble	dais.	His	uncle’s
former	counsellors	and	the	leading	nobles	of	Samarkand	were	waiting	in	meek	lines	at	its	foot.
He	 dismounted,	 stepped	 on	 to	 the	 dais	 and	 made	 his	 way	 to	 its	 centre	 where	 a	 gilded	 throne,	 with
carved	tiger	feet,	waited.	With	so	many	scrutinising	him,	he	was	suddenly	self-conscious	as	he	gathered
his	voluminous	robes	about	him	and	sat	down	with	as	much	dignity	as	he	could	manage.	He	was	still	so
young	–	not	quite	fourteen.	What	would	people	think	to	see	a	boy	seated	before	them?	But,	he	told	himself,
Samarkand	was	his	–	by	blood	and	conquest.	He	lifted	his	chin	and	stared	proudly	ahead.
Sitting	stiffly	on	the	splendid	throne,	he	received	the	oath	of	allegiance	from	his	new	subjects	and	in
turn	 distributed	 offices	 and	 more	 of	 the	 vizier’s	 hoarded	 wealth.	 But	 as	 rank	 after	 rank	 of	 figures
advanced	to	prostrate	themselves	before	him,	Babur	knew	there	was	scarcely	a	man	among	them	he	could
trust.	The	thought	sobered	him	and	the	grand	vizier’s	contemptuous	words	thrust	themselves	into	his	mind:
‘You’ll	never	hold	Samarkand.’
He	would	prove	to	the	people	he	was	fit	to	rule.	Hadn’t	he	already	shown	mercy	and	generosity?	He
had	pardoned	all	who	would	submit	to	his	authority.	The	women	of	the	grand	vizier’s	harem	would,	in
due	course,	be	found	places	in	those	of	Babur’s	chiefs	instead	of	being	ravished	in	the	first	moments	of

victory.	As	for	the	vizier’s	daughter,	he	had	already	despatched	her	to	his	cousin	Mahmud	in	Kunduz.	She
had	shown	little	reluctance.	Indeed,	she	should	be	pleased.	Not	only	would	she	be	wife	to	a	royal	prince
of	 the	 House	 of	 Timur,	 but	 Mahmud	 had	 saved	 her	 only	 two	 years	 previously	 from	 being	 raped	 by
brigands.	He	had	been	so	smitten	with	her	that	he	had	laid	siege	to	Samarkand	for	her	sake.
Yes,	 he	 had	 acted	 well,	 Babur	 reflected.	 The	 people	 had	 no	 reason	 to	 fear	 him	 and	 every	 reason	 to
respect	him.	All	the	same,	the	grand	vizier	had	planted	a	malignant	canker	in	his	mind	.	.	.
Suddenly	Babur	heard	Wazir	Khan	proclaim,	‘Hail,	Babur,	King	of	Samarkand!’	The	cry	taken	up	by
thousands	of	voices	filled	the	square	and	roused	Babur	from	his	thoughts.	He	was	a	fool	to	let	a	dead	man
whose	 body	 now	 hung	 in	 a	 cage	 to	 rot	 torment	 him.	 As	 he	 had	 agreed	 with	 Wazir	 Khan	 when	 they	 had
arranged	the	ceremony,	Babur	took	the	cry	as	his	cue.	He	rose	and	turned	slowly	to	face	each	side	of	the
crowded	square,	allowing	all	to	gaze	up	on	their	new	king.	Then	he	told	the	populace,	‘My	rule	will	bring
peace	and	prosperity	to	all	the	citizens	of	Samarkand.	As	a	token	of	this,	I	will	remit	a	month	of	the	taxes
levied	on	the	city’s	markets.’
The	 crowd	 roared	 its	 approval.	 Though	 his	 own	 expression	 remained	 impassive,	 jubilation	 welled
inside	him	again.	Timur	had	been	thirty-one,	more	than	twice	his	age,	when	he	had	seized	Samarkand.	It
had	been	his	first	great	conquest,	the	springboard	to	a	mighty	empire.	And	so	it	would	be	for	Babur.
Tonight	he	would	have	food	distributed	throughout	the	city	to	alleviate	the	sufferings	of	the	siege	as	a
further	demonstration	of	his	largesse.	For	himself	and	his	men,	there	would	be	feasting	and	here,	at	least,
he	 could	 already	 outshine	 Timur,	 whose	 tastes	 had	 been	 austere:	 his	 favourite	 dishes	 had	 been	 roasted
horsemeat,	 boiled	 mutton	 and	 rice.	 They	 would	 eat	 fat	 sheep	 brought	 into	 the	 starving	 city	 from	 the
meadows	beyond	and	already	turning	on	the	spit.	Partridges	and	pheasants	were	simmering	in	succulent
sauces	flavoured	with	pomegranates	and	tamarinds.	Ripe	melons	bursting	with	juice	sweet	as	honey	and
purple	grapes	with	the	bloom	still	on	them	were	being	piled	on	jewelled	salvers.	Babur’s	mouth	watered.
The	 ceremonials	 were	 at	 an	 end	 but	 Babur	 still	 had	 something	 to	 do	 before	 the	 celebrations	 began.
Slowly	 he	 stepped	 from	 the	 dais	 and	 remounted	 his	 horse.	 Signalling	 to	 Wazir	 Khan	 and	 his	 guard	 to
follow,	 he	 trotted	 out	 of	 the	 square	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 Gur	 Emir,	 the	 ribbed,	 egg-shaped,	 blue-tiled
dome	with	its	two	slender	minarets	that	was	Timur’s	tomb.
At	 the	 tall,	 arched	 gatehouse	 of	 the	 walled	 complex,	 Babur	 jumped	 down.	 For	 reasons	 he	 could	 not
have	explained,	he	needed	to	be	alone.	He	asked	Wazir	Khan	and	his	guards	to	wait,	then	went	inside.	He
crossed	 a	 courtyard	 where	 sparrows	 fluttered	 amid	 the	 branches	 of	 a	 mulberry	 tree,	 took	 off	 his
embroidered	boots,	as	custom	demanded,	and	entered	the	tomb.
The	contrast	with	the	bright	light	outside	made	it	hard	to	see	and	he	came	blinking	into	an	octagonal
chamber.	The	sombre	richness	he	saw	in	the	shafts	of	tawny	light	filtering	through	fretted	arches	high	in
the	wall	made	him	gasp.	He	ran	his	fingers	over	marble	walls	inlaid	with	green	alabaster	and	surmounted
at	head	level	by	a	band	of	gilded	tiles.	Above	that,	the	walls	were	embellished	with	carved	papier-mâché
painted	 blue	 and	 gold	 and	 set	 around	 panels	 in	 which	 verses	 from	 the	 Koran	 were	 written	 in	 exquisite
calligraphy.	He	craned	his	neck	to	see	the	domed	ceiling	painted	with	gilded	stars	dancing	riotously	in
their	private	heaven.
Directly	beneath	the	dome	a	sarcophagus	lay	on	a	plain	marble	platform.	It	was	at	least	six	feet	long,
with	a	lid	of	green	jade	so	dark	it	looked	almost	black	–	a	fitting	monument	to	Timur	but	not,	as	Babur
knew,	where	he	lay.	To	one	side	of	the	chamber,	a	sloping	vaulted	passage	led	to	a	lower	crypt.	After	a
few	moments,	Babur	entered	it.	The	passage	was	so	narrow	that	his	shoulders	brushed	the	cold	walls	as
slowly	he	descended	–	bare	feet	slipping	on	smooth	stone	–	to	emerge	into	a	much	smaller,	simpler	room.
A	small	marble	screen	high	in	the	wall	and	carved	like	honeycomb	was	the	only	source	of	light,	which
fell	in	faint	shafts	on	to	the	carved	white	marble	coffin	that	contained	Timur’s	body.

When	Timur	had	died	on	his	march	to	conquer	China,	his	attendants	had	perfumed	and	preserved	his
corpse	 with	 rosewater,	 camphor	 and	 musk	 before	 carrying	 it	 back	 in	 glory	 to	 Samarkand	 and	 laying	 it
here.	Despite	the	lavish	funeral	ceremony,	it	was	said	the	great	conqueror	had	not,	at	first,	found	peace.
Night	 after	 night	 the	 sound	 of	 wild	 howling	 that	 rose	 from	 his	 tomb	 had	 terrified	 the	 citizens	 of
Samarkand.	 The	 dead	 emperor	 seemed	 unable	 to	 take	 his	 eternal	 rest.	 The	 screeches	 had	 lasted	 a	 year
until,	finally,	the	desperate	people	had	gone	to	Timur’s	son.	They	had	tumbled	to	their	knees	before	him,
begging	him	to	free	the	prisoners,	especially	the	craftsmen,	Timur	had	seized	during	his	wars	of	conquest
and	 brought	 to	 Samarkand	 to	 beautify	 his	 capital	 so	 that,	 as	 the	 released	 men	 journeyed	 to	 their	 earthly
homes,	Timur	could	finally	make	his	way	to	his	heavenly	one.	Seeing	the	frightened,	harrowed	faces	of	his
subjects,	Timur’s	son	had	listened.	The	prisoners	had	been	sent	back	to	their	homelands	and	Timur	had
howled	no	more.
Tales	for	old	women,	Babur	thought.	But	there	was	another	story	he	did	believe	–	it	was	said	that	an
epitaph	had	been	engraved	on	the	underside	of	Timur’s	coffin	lid:	‘If	I	am	roused	from	my	grave,	the	earth
will	tremble.’
Babur	approached	the	coffin	reverently.	Almost	afraid,	he	stretched	out	his	hand	to	touch	the	lid	where,
standing	 out	 boldly,	 was	 a	 carved	 inscription	 recounting	 Timur’s	 ancestry.	 My	 ancestry,	 Babur	 thought.
My	 blood.	 He	 lowered	 his	 head	 and	 pressed	 his	 lips	 to	 the	 chill	 stone.	 ‘I	 will	 be	 worthy	 of	 you,’	 he
whispered.	It	was	a	promise	to	the	great	Timur,	and	to	his	dead	father.	But,	above	all,	it	was	a	promise	to
himself.

The	 soft	 morning	 breeze	 stirred	 the	 gauzy,	 pearl-sewn	 hangings	 of	 the	 pavilion	 in	 the	 Baghi	 Dilkusha,
Timur’s	Garden	of	Heart’s	Delight,	where	–	nearly	two	months	after	his	triumphal	entry	into	Samarkand	–
Babur	was	asleep.	Of	all	the	parks	that	Timur	had	built	in	the	fields	and	meadows	around	Samarkand,	this
was	Babur’s	favourite.	The	previous	evening,	with	the	sun	already	setting,	on	impulse	he	had	summoned
Wazir	Khan	and	his	bodyguard.	They	had	ridden	out	through	the	Turquoise	Gate	and	down	the	two-mile
avenue	of	stately,	gently	swaying	poplars	that	led	eastward	to	the	garden.	Though	night	had	been	falling	as
they	galloped	in	through	the	gateway,	Babur	had	been	able	to	see	Timur’s	domed	and	colonnaded	summer
palace,	gleaming	like	a	great	pearl	through	the	dark	trees	and	the	pale	outlines	of	the	airy	pavilions	that
surrounded	it.
Babur	 had	 chosen	 to	 sleep	 in	 one	 of	 the	 pavilions,	 its	 graceful	 marble	 pillars	 inlaid	 with	 Chinese
porcelain	 and	 surrounded	 by	 elms,	 plane	 trees	 and	 slender,	 dark	 green	 cypresses.	 He	 knew	 that	 Timur,
too,	had	liked	to	sleep	in	his	gardens.	He	had	even	ordered	his	throne	to	be	placed	on	a	platform	erected
above	the	intersection	of	two	watercourses.	The	four	gushing	channels	represented	the	four	rivers	of	life
and	symbolised	his	dominion	over	the	four	quarters	of	the	globe.
The	 more	 Babur	 contemplated	 Timur,	 the	 more	 breathtaking	 his	 vision	 and	 ambitions	 seemed.	 It	 was
easy	 to	 speak	 of	 himself	 as	 Timur’s	 heir,	 but	 when	 he	 considered	 what	 that	 meant,	 he	 felt	 humbled	 and
exhilarated.
Something	–	perhaps	the	cackle	of	a	pheasant	–	roused	him	from	his	dreams.	He	sat	up	with	a	start	and
looked	around	him.	The	luxury	–	the	floors	inlaid	with	black	ebony	and	pale	ivory,	the	marble	sculptures,
the	golden	flasks	and	cups	encrusted	with	emeralds,	turquoises	and	rubies	–	was	still	hard	to	take	in.	He
touched	the	rose-coloured	silk,	shot	through	with	golden	thread,	of	the	mattress	on	which	he	was	lying.
This	 mattress	 was	 itself	 screened	 from	 his	 attendants	 by	 a	 delicately	 wrought	 silver	 and	 gilt	 screen	 set

with	rose	quartz.
Whatever	the	grand	vizier’s	crimes,	at	least	he	had	preserved	the	treasures	of	Timur’s	summer	palace.
At	the	first	sign	of	trouble,	he	had	ordered	all	the	costly	carpets,	hangings	and	vessels	to	be	carried	to
Samarkand	 where	 he	 had	 secreted	 them	 in	 underground	 treasure	 chambers	 within	 the	 citadel.	 His
officials,	anxious	to	ingratiate	themselves	with	their	new	ruler,	had	been	quick	to	reveal	them	to	Babur’s
men.	 Though	 some	 of	 the	 palace’s	 precious	 inlay	 had	 been	 chipped	 away	 and	 several	 lesser	 pavilions
constructed	mainly	of	timber	had	been	knocked	down	to	provide	fuel	–	probably	by	his	own	men	during
the	siege,	Babur	reflected	–	it	had	not	taken	long	to	restore	its	beauty.
Babur	grinned	as	he	contemplated	what	his	mother,	grandmother	and	sister	would	say	when,	as	soon	as
it	was	safe,	he	summoned	them.	His	letters,	scratched	on	the	fine,	thick	paper	for	which	Samarkand	was
famous,	had	not	done	justice	to	its	grandeur,	history	or	scale.	After	all,	this	was	a	city	founded	eighteen
centuries	 previously	 by	 golden-haired,	 blue-eyed	 Alexander	 who,	 coming	 from	 the	 far	 west	 with	 his
armies,	had,	like	Timur,	brushed	aside	all	opposition.	Babur	had	ordered	Samarkand’s	outer	walls	with
their	thick	ramparts	to	be	measured	and	discovered	it	would	take	a	man	eleven	thousand	paces	to	walk
round	them.	Timur	had	indeed	protected	his	city	well	–	though	one	of	Babur’s	first	acts	had	been	to	brick
up	 the	 tunnel	 through	 which	 he	 himself	 had	 sneaked	 in.	 He	 did	 not	 wish	 others	 –	 and	 there	 were	 many
whose	eyes	would	be	on	the	rich	prize	of	Samarkand	–	to	follow	literally	in	his	footsteps.	He	had	also
ordered	a	thorough	search	for	any	other	tunnels.
Babur	 lay	 back	 on	 the	 duck-down	 pillows.	 The	 past	 weeks	 had	 been	 so	 rich	 in	 new	 sights	 and
experiences	that	it	seemed	incredible	so	little	time	had	passed.	In	his	letters	to	his	grandmother,	who	was
interested	 in	 such	 things,	 he	 had	 tried	 to	 capture	 his	 astonishment	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 round,	 three-storey
observatory	on	high	Kohak	Hill	outside	the	city	where	Timur’s	grandson,	Ulugh	Beg,	had	studied	the	solar
and	lunar	calendars.	Babur	had	gazed	in	utter	amazement	at	Ulugh	Beg’s	sextant,	a	perfect	arc	of	marbleclad	brick,	nearly	two	hundred	feet	long	with	a	radius	of	some	130	feet	and	decorated	with	the	signs	of
the	zodiac.	Ulugh	Beg	had	made	his	observations	and	taken	his	measurements	using	an	astrolabe	mounted
on	metal	rails	at	either	side	of	the	sextant.
If	Timur	had	conquered	the	world,	his	armies	moving	like	a	cloud	of	locusts	over	a	green	field,	it	was
Ulugh	Beg	who	had	captured	the	heavens.	He	had	composed	the	royal	astronomical	tables	still	used	by	the
star-gazers	 of	 Samarkand.	 Babur	 wished	 he	 had	 paid	 more	 attention	 to	 his	 lessons	 but,	 even	 so,	 the
sophistication	of	the	observatory	filled	him	with	pride	at	his	ancestors’	achievements.	Ulugh	Beg’s	own
son,	concerned	where	his	father’s	quest	for	knowledge	and	enlightenment	might	lead	and	encouraged	by
fanatical	mullahs,	fearful	that	their	mysteries	might	be	penetrated	and	their	dogmas	questioned,	had	had
him	murdered.
Babur	had	inspected	the	religious	college	Ulugh	Beg	had	built.	It	filled	one	side	of	the	Registan	Square,
and	 was	 decorated	 with	 turquoise	 and	 navy	 blue	 tiles,	 their	 pattern	 so	 intricate	 that	 men	 called	 it
hazarbaf,	 ‘thousand-weave’.	 The	 huge	 Bibi	 Khanym	 mosque	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 city	 had	 overwhelmed
him.	 Nothing	 could	 have	 been	 more	 different	 from	 the	 plain,	 austere	 mosque	 in	 his	 castle	 of	 Ferghana
where,	what	seemed	a	lifetime	ago,	in	the	shafting	moonlight,	his	chiefs	had	sworn	their	loyalty	to	him.
A	 priest	 told	 Babur	 how	 Timur’s	 favourite	 wife,	 Bibi	 Khanym,	 the	 ivory-skinned	 Chinese	 princess
whose	luminous	beauty	could	move	the	great	conqueror	to	tears,	had	intended	the	mosque	as	a	surprise	for
Timur	on	his	return	from	a	campaign.	But	the	architect	she	had	summoned	from	Persia	to	build	it	had,	in	a
moment	of	reckless	passion,	seized	her	and	left	a	love-bite	on	her	neck.	When	Timur	returned	just	days
later	and	saw	the	blemish	on	his	wife’s	otherwise	flawless	skin	and	heard	her	story,	he	had	sent	soldiers
to	seize	the	architect	who,	in	terror,	had	flung	himself	from	one	of	the	sky-touching	minarets	he	had	just
built.	Whatever	the	truth	of	the	tale,	the	tall,	graceful	portal	flanked	by	columns	more	than	150	feet	high,

and	the	mosque’s	even	higher	dome	–	decorated	with	mosaics	–	had	left	Babur	dumb	with	awe.
Babur	 yawned	 and	 stretched.	 His	 mother	 would	 be	 all	 pleasure	 and	 delight	 when	 she	 reached
Samarkand,	 and	 Khanzada	 would	 be	 dizzy	 with	 excitement	 and	 curiosity.	 But	 he	 wasn’t	 so	 sure	 about
Esan	Dawlat.	His	grandmother	was	hard	to	please.	He	could	imagine	her	small	dark	eyes	scrunching	up	in
her	wrinkled	face	as	she	shook	her	head	and	told	him	not	to	get	carried	away	with	his	initial	victory	but	to
think	about	what	next.
Yet	he	had	claimed	his	prize	well,	Babur	thought.	Fate	had	held	it	out	to	him	in	an	open	hand	and	he	had
grabbed	it.	He	clapped,	and	instantly	an	attendant	appeared	with	a	ewer	of	warm,	rose-scented	water	that
he	 poured	 into	 a	 large	 silver	 bowl.	 Carrying	 it	 carefully,	 he	 approached	 Babur,	 intending	 to	 wash	 him
with	 the	 cloth	 he	 was	 also	 holding,	 but	 Babur	 waved	 him	 away,	 still	 unused	 to	 having	 someone	 to	 do
everything	for	him,	and	asked	him	to	place	the	bowl	and	cloth	on	the	stand	as	his	side.	As	he	gazed	at	his
reflection	in	the	smooth	surface	of	the	water	he	felt	an	unexpected	yearning	to	dip	his	head	into	the	chill
waters	of	one	of	Ferghana’s	mountain	streams.
But	then	he	caught	the	delicious	scent	of	new	baked	bread	and	roasting	partridges.	He	was	a	fool	to	feel
wistful	or	homesick	when	he	was	in	Paradise.	His	men,	too,	seemed	content	–	which	was	rare,	he	mused,
as	he	scrubbed	his	neck	and	shoulders.	But,	after	all,	they	had	the	booty	he’d	promised.	The	coin-stuffed
coffers	of	Samarkand	had	proved	deep	enough	for	him	to	be	generous.	He	had	given	each	of	his	chieftains
a	hundred	thick	gold	pieces	and	their	men	had	been	well	rewarded	with	silver.	Neither	had	he	forgotten	to
send	some	of	the	bounty	back	to	Ferghana	to	his	regent	Kasim,	to	reward	him	and	Babur’s	other	followers
and	to	assist	him	in	retaining	the	allegiance	of	the	fractious	surrounding	tribes.	Many	of	Babur’s	men	had
acquired	 new	 wives	 too.	 As	 he	 anticipated,	 the	 young	 women	 of	 the	 grand	 vizier’s	 harem	 had	 gone	 to
them	willingly	enough.	A	victorious	warrior	with	a	bag	of	money	was	not	a	bad	bargain.
It	was	time	to	dress.	Suppressing	his	impatience,	he	allowed	his	attendants,	swarming	sycophantically
round	him,	to	clothe	him	in	a	white	silk	shirt,	and	trousers	of	soft	deerskin.	Then,	from	the	many	they	held
out	to	him,	he	selected	a	brocade	tunic	–	brilliant	green	in	deference	to	his	new	people,	but	striped	with
the	 yellow	 of	 Ferghana	 –	 with	 enamelled	 clasps.	 The	 exquisitely	 stitched	 garments,	 the	 best	 that
Samarkand’s	tailors	could	provide,	felt	very	different	from	the	practical	sheepskins	and	coarser	cloth	of
Ferghana.	 An	 attendant	 wound	 a	 fringed	 sash	 round	 his	 waist,	 arranging	 the	 folds	 with	 mathematical
precision,	 and	 another	 knelt	 to	 guide	 his	 feet	 into	 gold-tooled,	 knee-length	 leather	 boots.	 Then,	 finally,
from	 a	 sandalwood	 casket,	 Babur	 selected	 some	 jewels.	 He	 had	 no	 interest	 in	 such	 things	 but	 later	 he
would	pray	in	public	in	the	Bibi	Khanym	mosque	and	he	must	appear	to	his	watching	subjects	every	inch
a	 king	 whose	 riches	 –	 and	 consequently	 his	 bounty	 –	 were,	 in	 a	 world	 of	 ever-shifting	 alliances	 and
loyalties,	inexhaustible.
With	 his	 mace-bearer	 ahead	 and	 four	 tall	 bodyguards	 behind,	 Babur	 walked	 along	 a	 marble	 path	 to
where	 his	 counsellors	 were	 waiting	 for	 him	 in	 the	 gardens,	 sitting	 cross-legged	 on	 carpets	 beneath	 a
flowered	 awning.	 Babur	 found	 these	 endless	 meetings	 irksome	 but	 there	 was	 much	 to	 be	 done.	 The
uncertainty	and	strife	after	his	uncle’s	death,	and	the	siege,	had	done	a	great	deal	of	damage.	Though	the
fields	and	meadows	around	Samarkand	were	fertile	enough,	the	farmers	had	been	too	afraid	to	tend	them,
and	 much	 of	 this	 year’s	 harvest	 had	 been	 lost.	 Babur	 had	 ordered	 seed	 corn	 from	 his	 own	 supplies,
brought	from	Ferghana,	to	be	distributed	among	them	for	the	next	spring.	Also,	many	of	the	herdsmen	had
fled,	driving	their	flocks	westward	and	away	from	the	fighting.	They	would	need	to	be	coaxed	back.
But	at	least	he	had	good	men	to	help	him,	Babur	thought.	Wazir	Khan,	of	course,	was	chief	among	his
ichkis,	 his	 inner	 circle	 of	 counsellors.	 But	 there	 was	 also	 Baisanghar,	 who	 commanded	 much	 respect
among	 the	 soldiers	 of	 Samarkand.	 Only	 after	 the	 city	 had	 fallen	 had	 Babur	 realised	 just	 how	 much	 the
weak	 resistance	 he	 had	 encountered	 had	 been	 due	 to	 Baisanghar’s	 cajoling,	 subverting	 and	 bribing.	 In

gratitude	he	had	given	him	overall	command	of	the	defences	of	Samarkand.
His	eyes	fell	on	the	weathered	face	of	Ali	Mazid	Beg.	He	had	been	wise	to	make	him	a	counsellor.	It
was	partly	a	reward	for	past	loyalty	–	the	chief	had	been	one	of	the	few	to	support	Babur	unequivocally
from	the	outset	–	but	it	was	also	shrewd.	Ali	Mazid	Beg	was	one	of	the	most	influential	tribal	leaders	of
Ferghana.	 That	 he	 had	 remained	 with	 Babur	 in	 Samarkand	 had	 helped	 in	 persuading	 others	 –	 including
some	who	Babur	had	feared	might	return	at	once	to	Ferghana	–	to	stay.
But,	of	course,	many	had	not.	Loot	was	what	they	had	come	for,	and	once	they	had	it,	they	were	restless
for	 their	 homelands.	 The	 wild,	 unruly	 Chakraks,	 whose	 reputation	 for	 fickleness	 and	 brutality	 was
notorious	 even	 in	 a	 world	 where	 treachery	 and	 cruelty	 were	 common,	 had	 melted	 away	 to	 their
inaccessible	mountain	fastnesses	and	more	were	following	each	day	as	autumn	drew	on.
Babur’s	 counsellors	 knelt	 at	 his	 approach	 but	 he	 waved	 them	 to	 their	 feet,	 eager	 to	 get	 on	 with	 the
business	 of	 the	 day.	 He	 had	 already	 learned	 that	 a	 king’s	 duties	 were	 not	 concerned	 merely	 with	 great
matters.	Only	yesterday	he	had	arbitrated	in	a	tedious	dispute	between	two	hawk-featured	carpet	dealers,
squabbling	like	children	over	the	value	of	a	red,	pink	and	blue	rug	from	Tabriz	in	far-distant	Persia.	It	had
cost	him	much	to	keep	a	straight	face.
‘Majesty,	 here	 are	 today’s	 petitions.’	 His	 chamberlain	 presented	 him	 with	 a	 silver	 dish	 piled	 with
papers	weighted	down	by	a	square	of	brass	to	prevent	them	flying	away	in	the	breeze.
Babur’s	 heart	 sank	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 the	 dense	 scrawl	 covering	 the	 topmost	 document.	 Probably	 an
argument	about	a	sheep	or	a	goat	or	grazing	rights	on	a	barren	hillside.	‘I’ll	look	at	them	later.’	He	wished
he	could	go	hunting	instead.	He	waved	to	his	council	to	be	seated	and	took	his	own	place	on	an	ivoryinlaid	stool	on	a	low	wooden	dais.	It	was	much	less	comfortable	than	sitting	cross-legged	on	the	floor	as
they	were.
‘When	will	the	review	of	the	city’s	fortifications	be	complete?’	he	asked	Baisanghar.
‘Soon,	Majesty.	The	final	count	has	been	made	of	the	weapons	in	the	armouries	but	the	masons	are	still
checking	the	condition	of	the	outer	walls	and	ramparts.	They	say	that	the	earthquake	two	years	ago	left
some	cracks	in	the	foundations	that	may	need	attention.’
Babur	 nodded.	 ‘Any	 repairs	 must	 be	 made	 quickly.	 That	 Samarkand	 fell	 so	 easily	 will	 not	 have
escaped	attention.	Wazir	Khan,	have	there	been	any	signs	of	Shaibani	Khan’s	men?’
‘We	are	on	constant	alert	against	their	return	but	the	many	scouts	we	have	about	our	borders	report	no
trace	of	Uzbek	patrols.	Shaibani	Khan	will	know	he	has	little	time	to	mount	a	campaign	before	winter.’
‘But	he	will	come,’	Babur	said	thoughtfully.	Shaibani	Khan	had	already	killed	one	king	of	Samarkand:
why	should	he	hesitate	to	destroy	another,	especially	one	who	was	just	a	youth	and	newly	on	his	throne?
‘Yes,	 Majesty,	 I’m	 sure	 of	 it.	 We	 all	 are.	 But	 he	 won’t	 be	 here	 until	 the	 spring.	 By	 then	 we	 will	 be
prepared	for	him	and	his	scum.’	Wazir	Khan’s	confidence	warmed	Babur.
The	sudden	sound	of	voices	made	them	all	look	round.	Across	the	gardens,	with	their	beds	of	bright
orange	marigolds	and	pink	roses,	Babur	saw	a	small,	stooped	figure	following	a	guard	towards	them.	He
was	dressed	in	travelling	clothes	and,	as	he	came	closer,	he	unwound	the	purple	scarf	he	had	wrapped
around	his	head	so	that	he	did	not	breathe	in	the	dust	of	the	road	and	Babur	recognised	the	lined	face	and
thin	 white	 hair	 of	 his	 grandmother’s	 elderly	 steward,	 Walid	 Butt.	 To	 Babur	 it	 seemed	 he	 looked
distressed,	not	just	by	his	long	journey	in	the	saddle	–	itself	a	considerable	trial	to	a	man	of	his	age	–	but
by	the	import	of	the	message	he	was	carrying.
For	 a	 moment,	 despite	 the	 late	 summer	 warmth,	 Babur	 felt	 a	 chill	 pass	 over	 him.	 Was	 Esan	 Dawlat
dead?	Rising	to	his	feet,	he	stepped	swiftly	from	the	dais	and	put	an	arm	round	the	old	man’s	shoulders.
‘Speak,	steward.	What	news	do	you	bring?’
Walid	Butt	hesitated,	as	if	he	was	not	sure	how	to	begin.	Babur	wanted	to	shout	at	him	to	get	on	with	it,

but	out	of	respect	for	a	man	he	had	known	his	whole	life	he	curbed	his	impatience.
‘Forgive	me,	Majesty,	for	appearing	before	you	like	this,	but	my	journey	has	been	a	hard	and	a	hasty
one.’	The	steward	fumbled	beneath	his	cloak	for	a	leather	bag	that	hung	from	his	neck	on	a	short	strap	and
produced	a	letter	impressed	with	the	royal	seal	of	Ferghana.
Babur	grabbed	it	and	tore	it	open.	He	recognised	his	grandmother’s	writing	and	breathed	more	easily,
but	his	relief	was	short-lived.	Esan	Dawlat’s	first	words	danced	before	his	eyes.	‘If	you	do	not	answer
our	call	of	distress,	we	face	ruin.’	He	scanned	the	rest	quickly,	his	shock	growing	as	he	took	in	what	his
grandmother	was	saying.
‘What	is	it?’	asked	Wazir	Khan.
‘I	have	been	betrayed.	My	bastard	half-brother	Jahangir	sits	on	the	throne	of	Ferghana	–	a	child	puppet
put	there	by	my	cousin	Tambal,	who	has	bribed	the	tribal	leaders	with	promises	of	reward	.	.	.	He	is	using
Jahangir	 for	 his	 own	 advantage	 .	 .	 .’	 Babur	 let	 the	 letter	 slip	 from	 his	 fingers	 to	 the	 ground	 where	 the
breeze	 blew	 it	 a	 short	 distance	 until	 it	 caught	 on	 one	 of	 the	 rose	 bushes.	 I	 have	 lost	 the	 throne	 of	 my
homeland,	he	thought.
While	Wazir	Khan	retrieved	the	letter	and	read	it	swiftly,	another	even	darker	concern	gripped	Babur.
Again	he	took	Walid	Butt	by	the	shoulder,	this	time	so	firmly	that	the	old	man,	who	had	scarcely	an	ounce
of	flesh	on	his	frame,	winced.	‘My	grandmother,	my	mother	and	my	sister,	when	did	you	last	see	them?
Where	are	they?	Are	they	safe?’
Walid	 Butt	 gazed	 sorrowfully	 at	 him.	 ‘They	 and	 your	 vizier	 Kasim	 are	 prisoners	 in	 the	 castle.	 Your
grandmother	managed	to	smuggle	this	letter	to	me	and	ordered	me	to	bring	it	to	you.	But	whether	they	are
alive	or	dead,	I	do	not	know.	I	have	been	travelling	these	past	two	weeks.’	His	voice	cracked.
Suddenly	realising	he	was	hurting	him,	Babur	relaxed	his	grip.	‘You	have	done	well,	steward.	You	must
eat	 and	 rest.	 Thank	 you	 for	 your	 service.’	 As	 Walid	 Butt	 was	 led	 away,	 it	 seemed	 to	 Babur	 that,	 if	 the
breeze	strengthened	only	a	little,	his	frail	form	would	be	blown	away.
Babur’s	 mind	 was	 reeling,	 his	 initial	 disbelief	 giving	 way	 to	 anger.	 How	 dared	 Tambal	 take	 his
kingdom	and	imprison	his	family	.	.	.	?	But	he	struggled	to	master	himself.	Everything	could	depend	on	the
decisions	he	was	about	to	take.	He	looked	up	to	see	his	council	watching	him	expectantly	and	took	a	deep
breath.
‘Wazir	Khan,	prepare	my	bodyguard.	We	will	ride	at	once	for	Ferghana.	Baisanghar,	assemble	a	force.
Call	 up	 my	 chiefs	 and	 their	 men	 –	 two	 thousand	 should	 be	 enough	 to	 deal	 with	 Tambal	 and	 his
indisciplined	tribal	levies.	I	expect	most	of	the	citizens	of	Ferghana	to	return	to	my	side	as	their	rightful
ruler	when	I	arrive	at	Akhsi.	However,	leave	enough	troops	here	to	defend	this	city	should	Shaibani	Khan
return,	and	follow	us	within	the	week.	Also,	have	battering	rams,	siege	engines	and	catapults	made	ready
in	case	I	send	for	them.	Ali	Mazid	Beg,	you	will	be	regent	of	Samarkand	in	my	absence.	Guard	it	well.’
The	three	older	men	nodded.	Babur	turned	away,	already	ripping	off	his	jewelled	fripperies	and	calling
for	his	riding	clothes	and	his	arms.

As	 he	 rode	 shoulder	 to	 shoulder	 with	 Wazir	 Khan,	 galloping	 over	 meadows	 still	 baked	 hard	 by	 the
summer	 heat,	 Babur	 was	 in	 torment.	 Guilt,	 fear	 for	 his	 family	 and	 fury	 against	 those	 who	 thought	 they
could	 supplant	 him	 with	 a	 nine-year-old	 battled	 inside	 him.	 What	 a	 fool	 he	 had	 been	 these	 last	 weeks,
wandering	around	Samarkand	lost	in	a	dream,	planning	how	to	show	off	his	fairytale	city	to	his	family.
He	had	neglected	what	was	most	important,	arrogantly	assuming	that	in	Ferghana	he	would	now	be	a

hero	 whom	 no	 one	 would	 dare	 challenge.	 Instead	 Tambal	 and	 his	 supporters	 had	 bided	 their	 time,	 like
wolves	waiting	until	the	shepherd’s	back	was	turned	to	run	in	among	the	flock.	And	they	had	surely	been
cunning	or	Kasim,	his	grandmother	and	his	mother	would	have	suspected	a	plot	and	warned	Babur	earlier.
If	anything	had	happened	to	the	women	of	his	family	.	.	.	If	Roxanna	should	use	her	power	as	mother	of
Ferghana’s	new	king	to	rid	herself	of	enemies	and	rivals	.	.	.	He	could	not	bear	to	think	of	it.
Each	 night	 when,	 exhausted	 from	 long	 hours	 in	 the	 saddle,	 they	 made	 camp,	 Babur	 found	 it	 hard	 to
sleep.	He	grudged	every	second	that	he	was	not	riding	eastward	and	became	angry	with	Wazir	Khan	for
insisting	he	must	rest.	But	on	the	fourth	night,	there	was	no	question	of	sleep.	As	he	lay	on	the	ground,	his
body	began	shaking	violently	and	his	brow	was	clammy	with	sweat.	By	the	time	dawn	broke,	his	teeth
were	chattering	so	much	that	he	could	barely	speak.	When	he	tried	to	stand,	his	legs	gave	way	and	he	fell
helplessly	 to	 the	 ground.	 At	 once	 Wazir	 Khan	 was	 beside	 him,	 feeling	 his	 pulse	 and	 pulling	 back	 his
eyelids	to	check	his	pupils.	‘Majesty,	you	cannot	ride	today.’
For	 once,	 Babur	 lacked	 the	 strength	 to	 argue.	 He	 felt	 Wazir	 Khan	 cover	 him	 with	 thick	 woollen
blankets,	but	as	he	tried	to	look	up	at	him,	the	world	swam	before	him	and	grew	dark.	Then	it	went	black.

Water	 was	 trickling	 between	 his	 parched	 lips.	 Babur’s	 tongue,	 half	 stuck	 to	 the	 roof	 of	 his	 mouth,
loosened,	seeking	the	drops	eagerly.	He	had	no	idea	where	he	was.	All	that	mattered	was	getting	some	of
that	precious	moisture.	At	last	his	eyes	jerked	open.	The	familiar	figure	of	Wazir	Khan	was	leaning	over
him,	a	long	strip	of	cotton	cloth	in	one	hand	and	a	water	bottle	in	the	other.	When	he	saw	that	Babur	was
conscious,	he	put	them	down	and	knelt	back.
Babur	 was	 still	 burning	 with	 thirst.	 ‘More	 water,’	 he	 wanted	 to	 say,	 but	 managed	 only	 a	 dry-lipped
croak.	Wazir	Khan	understood.	He	placed	the	end	of	the	cloth	between	Babur’s	lips	and	continued	what
he	had	been	doing,	unknown	to	Babur,	for	the	past	hour:	pouring	a	thin	stream	of	water	down	the	cloth	so
that	it	flowed	a	few	drops	at	a	time	into	Babur’s	mouth.
After	a	long	while,	Babur	choked,	spluttered	and	managed	to	sit	up.	Wazir	Khan	put	the	cloth	and	the
water	bottle	to	one	side	and	felt	his	forehead.	‘Your	temperature	is	falling	at	last,	Majesty.’
Looking	around	him,	Babur	saw	they	were	inside	a	small	cave	with	a	fire	at	the	centre.	His	head	spun
and	he	closed	his	eyes.	‘How	long	have	I	been	ill?’
‘Four	days,	Majesty.	It	is	now	midday	on	the	fifth.’
‘What	was	it?	Not	poison,	surely	.	.	.	?’
Wazir	Khan	shook	his	head.	‘No.	Just	a	high	fever	–	probably	the	result	of	a	sheep-tick	bite.’
Babur	almost	smiled	–	a	tick	bite	at	a	time	like	this.
‘Fetch	 some	 broth,’	 Wazir	 Khan	 called	 to	 one	 of	 his	 men.	 When	 the	 bowl	 of	 millet-flour	 soup	 was
brought	he	knelt	beside	Babur,	holding	it	to	his	lips	with	one	hand	and	supporting	his	head	with	the	other.
The	 warm	 liquid	 tasted	 good	 but	 Babur	 could	 only	 manage	 a	 little	 before	 his	 stomach	 clenched	 and	 he
waved	the	bowl	aside.
‘Has	there	been	news	from	Samarkand?	Baisanghar	must	be	almost	ready	to	bring	the	army	after	us.’
‘No,	Majesty.	There	has	been	nothing.’
‘Or	from	Ferghana?’	Silently	Babur	cursed	the	ill	luck	that	had	struck	him	down.	By	now,	riding	hard
and	light,	the	mountains	of	Ferghana	should	have	been	in	sight.
Wazir	Khan	shook	his	head.	‘I	did	not	look	for	any	news.	I	sent	out	no	scouts.	My	concern	was	to	keep
you	 hidden	 until	 you	 had	 recovered.	 There	 will	 be	 many	 spies	 between	 here	 and	 Ferghana.	 If	 reports

reached	Ferghana	that	you	were	ill	–	or	dead	.	.	.’
He	left	the	words	unspoken	but	Babur	understood.	If	the	traitors	pulling	the	strings	of	their	little	puppet
king	thought	he	was	dead,	his	womenfolk	might	not	see	another	sunrise.
‘Thank	you,	Wazir	Khan.	As	always,	you	think	of	things	I	fail	to.’	Wazir	Khan’s	words	reminded	him
chillingly	 of	 his	 predicament.	 Babur	 lay	 back,	 willing	 the	 strength	 to	 flow	 back	 into	 his	 limbs	 but
miserably	conscious	of	how	weak	he	was.	‘I	will	rest	for	the	remainder	of	today,	but	tomorrow,	we	will
ride.’
‘Yes,	Majesty,	if	you	are	able	to.’
‘I	will	be.’	Babur	closed	his	eyes	again,	praying	that	he	was	right.
He	slept	most	of	that	day	and	night	but	woke	as	soon	as	the	dim	light	of	the	following	morning	crept
into	the	cave.	Sitting	up	cautiously	he	found	that	his	head	was	clearer	and	that,	though	he	still	felt	a	little
unsteady,	 he	 could	 stand	 unaided.	 With	 one	 hand	 against	 the	 lichen-covered	 wall,	 he	 walked	 stiffly
towards	the	cave	opening	and	ducked	outside.	Wazir	Khan	and	some	of	his	guards	were	squatting	around
a	small	fire	of	sheep’s	droppings	that	was	burning	brightly.	A	copper	kettle	was	suspended	above	it	from
a	makeshift	frame.
Wazir	Khan	handed	him	a	clay	cup	of	hot	water	that	tasted	of	smoke	and	a	piece	of	dry	bread	that	he
began	to	chew.	He	noticed	that	the	horses,	tethered	by	a	clump	of	gorse	bushes,	were	already	saddled	and
loaded.	Wazir	Khan	had,	as	always,	done	well.	Within	half	an	hour	they	had	kicked	earth	over	the	remains
of	their	fire,	filled	their	leather	water	bottles	from	a	stream	and	were	mounting.
Babur	pulled	himself	into	his	saddle	with	none	of	his	usual	spring,	feeling	the	eyes	not	only	of	Wazir
Khan	but	of	the	rest	of	his	men	upon	him.	For	a	moment	he	swayed,	but	then	he	kicked	his	horse	on	in	the
direction	of	the	sunrise	and	Ferghana.

Babur’s	heart	quickened	as,	in	the	distance,	he	made	out	the	Jaxartes	river	and	his	home.	The	robust	little
castle	 of	 Akhsi,	 half	 built	 into	 the	 cliff	 above	 the	 river,	 was	 the	 place	 of	 his	 earliest	 and	 fondest
memories.	At	this	moment,	the	glories	of	Samarkand	could	not	compete	and	he	felt	tears	rising.
‘Majesty,	it	is	dangerous	to	go	further	tonight.’	Wazir	Khan’s	eyes,	too,	were	bright	with	tears.	‘They’ll
be	watching	for	us.	We	should	stay	concealed	until	I’ve	sent	out	scouts.’
Babur	wanted	to	gallop	to	the	gates	and	demand	entry,	but	Wazir	Khan	was	right.	He	got	shakily	down
from	his	horse,	feeling	the	feverish	ache	in	his	limbs,	and	listened	as	Wazir	Khan	selected	his	two	best
and	swiftest	horsemen	to	ride	onwards	and	find	out	what	they	could.
The	 fortress	 was	 at	 least	 an	 hour’s	 journey,	 perhaps	 more	 in	 the	 gathering	 darkness,	 and	 the	 scouts
would	need	to	take	care	not	to	be	seen.	It	would	be	some	while	before	they	returned.	Perched	as	Babur
and	his	men	were	high	on	the	side	of	a	hill	and	reluctant	to	retreat	back	over	the	crest,	their	position	was
too	exposed	to	risk	a	fire	to	warm	themselves	or	cook	over.	Not	that	they	had	much	to	cook.	In	the	six
days	since	Babur’s	recovery,	they	had	travelled	too	fast	to	forage	or	hunt,	Instead	they	had	relied	mainly
on	 the	 now	 mouldering	 bread,	 cheese,	 apples	 and	 dried	 fruit	 they	 had	 brought	 from	 Samarkand.	 Babur
wrapped	himself	in	a	blanket	and	chewed	a	strip	of	dried	melon.	Its	sweetness	disgusted	him	and	he	spat
it	out,	taking	a	long	draught	of	water	to	rid	himself	of	the	cloying	taste.
The	scouts	returned	two	hours	before	dawn,	and	the	news	was	bad,	as	Babur	had	suspected	it	would
be.	The	castle	gates	were	barred	and	many	defenders	were	keeping	watch	from	the	walls.	According	to	a
herdsman	the	scouts	had	surprised	as	he	sat	around	his	fire	in	a	riverside	pasture	with	his	two	young	sons,

who	had	been	too	terrified	to	speak	anything	but	the	truth,	many	of	the	nomadic	tribal	leaders	had	sworn	to
support	Babur’s	half-brother.	It	didn’t	surprise	Babur	to	learn	that	the	chieftain	whose	men	he	had	ordered
hacked	to	death	for	stealing	the	peasant’s	goods	and	raping	his	wife	outside	Samarkand	was	among	them.
And	of	course,	Jahangir’s	grandfather.	Babur	thought	of	the	sly-faced	old	man	who	had	brought	Roxanna
and	 her	 brat	 to	 the	 castle.	 He	 should	 never	 have	 taken	 them	 in	 –	 but	 what	 else	 could	 he	 have	 done?
Jahangir	was	his	half-brother.	Blood	was	blood.
It	 was	 no	 surprise	 either	 that	 Yusuf,	 his	 father’s	 stout	 treasurer,	 together	 with	 Baba	 Qashqa,	 his
comptroller	of	the	household,	and	Baqi	Beg,	his	thin,	fidgety	astrologer,	had	joined	his	half-brother	since
–	though	Babur	had	allowed	them	to	live	–	he	had	forced	them	to	yield	their	profitable	appointments.
His	thoughts	returned	to	his	grandmother,	mother	and	sister.	 The	 scouts	 had	 not	 been	 able	 to	 find	 out
anything	about	them.	He	cursed	his	powerlessness.	What	could	he	and	two	dozen	bodyguards	do	anyway?
He	must	wait	for	his	army	to	join	him.
As	 the	 sun	 rose	 behind	 Mount	 Beshtor,	 making	 the	 ever-present	 snow	 on	 the	 summit	 sparkle	 like
crystal,	Babur	wrapped	his	cloak	round	him,	and,	signalling	he	wished	to	be	alone,	began	to	tramp	up	the
hill	 on	 which	 they	 had	 camped.	 The	 emerald-green	 grass	 was	 slippery	 with	 dew	 beneath	 his	 feet.	 It
smelled	fresh	and	sweet.	But	before	long	winter	would	descend	and	these	slopes	would	be	frozen	hard
and	white.	It	was	a	worrying	thought.	How	could	he	campaign	in	winter?
The	wind	blowing	in	from	the	east	had	a	cold	bite.	Babur	settled	in	the	shelter	of	a	slab	of	rock	and	his
keen	eyes	scanned	the	landscape	whose	contours	he	knew	so	intimately	they	felt	like	part	of	him	–	every
sweep	 of	 green	 meadowland,	 every	 steep-sided	 valley	 with	 its	 patches	 of	 grey	 scree,	 every	 jagged
mountain	peak,	every	bend	in	the	Jaxartes.	The	sense	of	loss	overwhelmed	him	and	he	bowed	his	head.
The	sun	had	risen	high	in	a	bright,	cloudless	sky	when	Babur	heard	the	distant	thud	of	hoofbeats	coming
from	the	west.	Leaping	up,	he	turned	to	look	behind	him	and,	sure	enough,	in	the	distance,	he	could	see	a
long	 line	 of	 riders	 coming	 along	 a	 valley.	 Narrowing	 his	 eyes,	 he	 tried	 to	 count	 them	 –	 perhaps	 two
hundred,	 maybe	 more	 –	 and	 caught	 the	 flash	 of	 a	 green	 standard.	 It	 must	 be	 the	 advance	 guard	 sent	 by
Baisanghar.
Feeling	 new	 energy	 surging	 through	 him,	 driving	 out	 the	 despair,	 he	 turned	 and	 ran	 down	 the	 hill
towards	the	camp,	slipping	and	rolling	in	his	eagerness.	‘Wazir	Khan,	the	troops	are	coming,’	he	shouted,
as	he	ran	into	the	camp.
‘You	are	sure	they	are	our	men?’
‘I’m	certain.	They	carry	the	green	banners	of	Samarkand.’
‘I	will	send	a	patrol	to	guide	them	to	us,	Majesty.’
Heart	 pounding,	 Babur	 watched	 the	 men	 gallop	 off.	 Now	 we’ll	 flush	 those	 scum	 out	 of	 the	 castle.
Tambal	will	repent	his	treachery	and	as	for	the	rest	.	.	.	Babur	ran	to	his	saddlebag	and	unstrapped	his
father’s	sword.	As	he	drew	it	from	its	scabbard,	the	rubies	in	the	eagle	hilt	flashed	in	the	sunlight.	It	felt
good	to	balance	it	in	his	hand	and	he	imagined	bringing	it	down,	in	a	slashing	sweep,	on	Tambal’s	bare
neck,	as	he	had	done	on	the	neck	of	Qambar-Ali	on	the	first	day	of	his	rule	in	Ferghana.
It	wasn’t	long	before	the	riders	were	in	view,	Baisanghar	himself	at	their	head.
Babur	stepped	forward.	Beneath	his	pointed	helmet,	Baisanghar	looked	exhausted.	‘When	will	the	main
army	get	here?	Are	they	far	away?’
Baisanghar	hesitated	a	moment	before	he	answered.	‘There	is	no	main	army,	Majesty.’
The	light	in	Babur’s	eyes	died.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Mahmud	of	Kunduz,	your	cousin,	has	seized	Samarkand.	He	must	have	been	plotting	with	Tambal	and
had	his	armies	ready.	He	waited	until	I	had	ridden	from	the	city	with	the	advance	guard,	then	made	his
attack.	He	was	aided	from	within	by	some	of	the	former	associates	of	the	grand	vizier	whom	the	vizier’s

daughter,	 Prince	 Mahmud’s	 wife,	 seems	 to	 have	 suborned	 through	 messengers	 promising	 extravagant
rewards.	We	had	been	riding	for	five	days	before	men	reached	me	with	the	news	of	Samarkand’s	fall.	I’m
sorry,	Majesty.	I	have	failed	you.’
‘Mahmud	.	.	.’	Babur	could	hardly	take	in	what	Baisanghar	had	said.	That	the	cousin	he’d	known	all	his
life	and	had	thought	of	as	a	friend	–	the	cousin	to	whom	he’d	only	recently	sent	the	gift	of	a	bride	–	should
betray	him	like	this	seemed	impossible.	‘What	of	Ali	Mazid	Beg?’
‘He	 is	 dead,	 Majesty.	 His	 body,	 not	 the	 grand	 vizier’s,	 now	 swings	 above	 the	 Turquoise	 Gate,	 and
many	others	who	were	loyal	to	you	are	dead.’
Babur	turned	away,	disgust	at	his	cousin	and	grief	for	the	loyal	Ali	Mazid	Beg	almost	overwhelming
him.	At	the	same	time,	his	mind	was	trying	to	grapple	with	something	else:	the	sheer	enormity	of	his	loss.
His	reign	over	Samarkand	had	been	–	what?	A	hundred	days	.	.	.	?	And	now	he	was	king	of	nothing,	not
even	 of	 Ferghana.	 He	 was	 still	 clutching	 his	 father’s	 sword	 and	 the	 solid	 feel	 of	 the	 hilt	 in	 his	 hand
comforted	him.	This	was	not	to	be	his	fate,	he	vowed,	gripping	the	hilt	still	tighter.	He	would	not	let	it	be.
However	long	it	took,	however	much	blood	he	spilled,	he	would	take	back	what	was	his.	Those	who	had
injured	him	would	pay.

	
	
	

Part	II
King	Without	a	Throne

	
	
	

Chapter	7
Hit	and	Run
	

The	 mixture	 of	 snow	 and	 sleet	 penetrated	 even	 the	 thick	 sheepskin-lined	 jacket	 in	 which	 Babur	 was
wrapped.	 He	 shivered	 as,	 head	 bowed	 against	 the	 elements,	 he	 rode	 at	 the	 head	 of	 his	 remaining	 men
beside	a	small	river,	the	edges	of	which	were	half	frozen,	up	a	remote	valley	among	the	high	mountains	to
the	north	of	Ferghana.
During	the	first	difficult	days	after	he	had	discovered	that	he	had	lost	not	one	but	both	of	his	kingdoms,
Babur	had	wanted	to	stay	near	Akhsi	in	the	hope	of	being	able	to	stake	all	on	getting	into	the	fortress	to
free	 his	 family.	 But	 Wazir	 Khan	 had	 with	 difficulty	 dissuaded	 him,	 pointing	 out	 that	 his	 enemies	 would
expect	such	a	desperate	attempt	and	would	be	on	guard	against	it.	Wazir	Khan,	fatherly	in	his	comforting
support,	had	advised,	‘If	you	wish	to	save	your	grandmother,	your	mother	and	your	sister,	you	must	not
throw	 your	 life	 away	 by	 taking	 extravagant	 risks	 but	 make	 your	 enemies	 fear	 you.	 To	 do	 this	 you	 must
pressure	 them,	 attacking	 now	 here,	 now	 there,	 disappearing	 before	 they	 can	 concentrate	 their	 forces
against	you.	Be	elusive,	ever-threatening.	Your	foes	must	never	sleep	soundly.	And	if	you	do	this,	Majesty,
they	will	not	dare	to	harm	your	family.’
At	length,	Babur	had	recognised	the	sense	of	what	Wazir	Khan	was	saying.	Thinking	carefully,	he	had
suggested	a	plan.	‘We	will	need	a	safe	base	where	we	can	see	out	the	winter	and	plan	our	first	raids.	I
remember	 that,	 as	 part	 of	 the	 military	 training	 you	 gave	 me	 each	 summer,	 you	 once	 took	 me	 on	 an
expedition	 to	 the	 northern	 mountains	 and	 we	 stayed	 in	 an	 old	 mud	 fort	 at	 the	 head	 of	 a	 valley	 where	 a
vassal	of	Tambal	commanded	the	small	garrison.	That	might	make	a	good	base.	It	is	little	visited.	What
d’you	think?’
‘I	remember	the	place.	It	is	indeed	remote	and	could	serve	our	purpose	well.’
And	 thus	 two	 weeks	 ago	 he	 and	 Wazir	 Khan	 had	 begun	 their	 ride	 towards	 the	 mountains.	 Only	 two
hundred	 men	 were	 accompanying	 them.	 Babur	 had	 selected	 them	 carefully	 with	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 help,
choosing	only	those	who	were	young,	like	himself,	and	without	family	ties,	or	those	who,	like	Baisanghar,
formed	 the	 trusted	 core	 of	 his	 inner	 circle.	 The	 rest	 he	 had	 despatched	 to	 their	 homes,	 telling	 them	 to
await	his	call,	which	they	could	be	sure	would	come.	The	snow	had	started	at	the	beginning	of	the	second
week	of	their	journey	and	had	grown	thicker	and	more	persistent	the	higher	they	had	climbed,	hampering
their	progress.
‘How	far	do	you	think	we	are	now	from	the	fort,	Wazir	Khan?’
‘If	 it	 weren’t	 for	 this	 foul	 weather,	 Majesty,	 we	 should	 be	 able	 to	 see	 it	 by	 now.	 But	 at	 least	 the
defenders	won’t	see	us	coming.	Let’s	pause	under	cover	of	those	trees	and	eat	some	of	the	dried	meat	we
still	have	in	our	saddlebags	while	we	send	some	scouts	ahead.’
The	snow	continued	to	fall	throughout	the	ninety	minutes	the	five	scouts	were	away,	sometimes	thickly,
sometimes	less	so.	When	the	men	returned	they	and	their	mounts	were	crusted	with	snow	and	their	leader
spoke	 through	 lips	 that	 were	 almost	 blue	 with	 cold.	 ‘The	 fort	 is	 only	 about	 two	 miles	 ahead,	 around	 a
bend.	There	are	no	hoofor	footprints	to	show	that	the	occupants	have	been	out	today,	either	to	patrol	or	to
man	outposts.	When	we	dismounted	and	crept	closer,	we	could	make	out	smoke	rising	from	one	part	of	the

fort	 –	 presumably	 the	 kitchens	 –	 but,	 most	 importantly,	 the	 main	 gate	 stood	 open.	 Clearly	 no	 one	 is
suspecting	an	attack	in	this	weather.’
‘Well	 they’re	 going	 to	 get	 a	 nasty	 surprise.	 Wazir	 Khan,	 let	 us	 not	 hesitate	 but	 mount	 up	 at	 once	 and
while	the	snow	continues	to	fall,	concealing	us,	let	the	scouts	lead	us	quietly	and	quickly	towards	where
the	way	bends	towards	the	fort.	Then	let	us	gallop	for	the	gate.’
Wazir	Khan	nodded,	and	within	five	minutes	the	column	was	on	the	move,	riding	in	single	file	up	the
gentle	slope	towards	the	head	of	the	valley.	After	about	two	miles,	through	the	snowflakes,	which	were
falling	more	lightly	now,	Babur	saw	the	shadow	of	a	rocky	outcrop	emerge.	As	he	did	so,	his	chief	scout
whispered,	 ‘The	 bend	 is	 at	 that	 outcrop.	 The	 fortress	 is	 only	 about	 a	 thousand	 yards	 ahead.	 The	 path
becomes	broader	now.’
‘We’ll	make	our	attack	from	here.	Tell	the	men	to	have	their	weapons	ready	but	to	leave	saddlebags
and	 any	 other	 unnecessary	 equipment	 here	 in	 the	 shadow	 of	 the	 outcrop	 so	 that	 we	 can	 gallop	 to	 the
fortress	as	fast	as	the	snow	will	allow.’
Quickly	 the	 soldiers	 began	 to	 prepare	 but	 before	 many	 had	 completed	 their	 task	 the	 snow	 stopped
entirely	and	there,	ahead,	was	the	fort	–	a	dark	shape	against	the	white	of	the	surrounding	snow.
‘Mount	up,	those	who	are	ready!	We	must	attack	before	we	are	seen!’	yelled	Babur	who,	even	as	he
spoke,	had	drawn	Alamgir	from	its	scabbard.	He	leaped	into	the	saddle	and	urged	his	black	horse	into	a
gallop	 towards	 the	 fort	 whose	 gate	 he	 could	 see	 remained	 open.	 With	 at	 most	 ten	 riders	 immediately
around	him,	and	the	rest	strung	out	to	his	rear,	he	felt	the	blood	pound	in	his	ears	as	he	bent	low	to	his
horse’s	neck.	When	he	was	only	two	hundred	yards	from	the	gate,	he	heard	a	shout	from	within	the	fort	–
they	had	been	seen.	The	gate	shuddered	and	juddered	as	men	inside	tried	to	push	it	closed	to	bar	it	against
the	sudden	threat	but	the	newly	fallen	snow	piled	against	it	stopped	it	moving	far.	Two	men	rushed	out,
futilely	kicking	at	the	snow	and	trying	to	force	the	gate	over	it.
‘Shoot	them	down!’	Babur	shouted,	but	did	not	slacken	his	pace.	Within	seconds	he	saw	one	of	the	men
fall,	an	arrow	in	his	throat.	Then	he	was	at	the	gate.	Slashing	at	the	second	man	with	Alamgir,	he	felt	the
sword	 bite	 home	 into	 soft	 flesh	 but	 did	 not	 pause	 to	 look	 where.	 Instead,	 pulling	 hard	 on	 the	 reins,	 he
jerked	his	horse’s	head	round	to	guide	it	through	the	still	partly	open	gate.	The	black	horse	snorted	and
Babur	felt	one	of	its	legs	slip	but	it	made	the	turn,	as	did	the	three	riders	immediately	behind	him.
But	 the	 fourth	 did	 not.	 Babur	 heard	 a	 thudding	 crash	 as	 horse	 and	 rider	 came	 down,	 blocking	 the
entrance.	He	was	in	the	fort	but	–	for	the	moment	at	least	–	with	only	three	men	to	assist	him.	Looking
about,	he	saw	men	rushing	out	through	the	tall	wide	door	to	what	must	be	the	fort’s	main	hall.	Some	were
struggling	to	pull	on	chain-mail,	others	to	draw	their	weapons.
‘Come!	Attack	them	now!’	Babur	kicked	his	horse	into	a	gallop	once	more,	and	soon	he	and	his	three
companions	 were	 among	 the	 panicking	 men,	 cutting	 them	 down.	 Suddenly	 Babur	 saw	 a	 tall	 man,	 who
appeared	to	be	one	of	their	chiefs,	duck	back	into	the	hall	and	urged	his	horse	on	after	him,	bending	low	to
pass	beneath	the	wooden	lintel.	Blinking	in	the	semi-darkness,	he	saw	that	the	twenty	or	thirty	men	who
had	 emerged	 from	 the	 hall	 must	 have	 been	 pretty	 much	 the	 entire	 garrison.	 Only	 the	 officer	 remained
within.	 He	 had	 run	 back	 towards	 a	 rack	 of	 weapons	 and	 grabbed	 a	 spear	 and	 shield	 before	 turning
towards	Babur.
‘Lay	down	your	weapons	on	the	orders	of	your	rightful	king,	I,	Babur	of	Ferghana.’
‘I	 will	 not.	 You	 are	 not	 my	 king.	 My	 name	 is	 Hanif	 Khan.	 I	 owe	 my	 loyalty	 to	 Tambal,	 who	 now
controls	the	land.	Vanquish	me	in	combat	if	you	can.’
Babur	leaped	from	his	horse	and,	with	Alamgir	in	his	hand,	advanced	towards	Hanif	Khan	who	–	as
soon	as	he	was	near	enough	–	thrust	at	Babur	with	his	spear.	Babur	jumped	aside,	but	as	he	did	so	his	left
foot	caught	against	the	leg	of	one	of	the	low	tables	on	which	lay	the	remains	of	a	meal.	Arms	flailing,	he

fell	on	to	the	table,	knocking	over	some	rough	wooden	goblets	and	spilling	their	contents.	The	wrist	of	his
sword	hand	caught	against	the	lip	of	a	large	metal	pot,	half	full	of	stew,	knocking	Alamgir	from	his	grasp.
Hanif	Khan	rushed	towards	him,	eager	to	take	advantage	of	this	piece	of	good	fortune	and	to	finish	him
off.	Raising	his	spear	above	his	head	in	both	hands	he	was	about	to	stab	its	point	into	Babur’s	exposed
throat	when	Babur	grabbed	a	large	wooden	platter	to	use	as	a	rough	shield.	The	spear	penetrated	but	did
not	split	it.	Rolling	to	one	side	amid	the	sticky	warm	mess	of	spilled	food	and	liquid,	Babur	let	go	of	the
platter	and	grabbed	the	spear	shaft,	twisting	it	as	he	did	so	and	wrenching	it	from	Hanif	Khan’s	grasp.
Undaunted,	Hanif	Khan	jumped	back	and	pulled	a	slim	dagger	from	his	sash.	Babur	had	no	time	to	look
for	where	Alamgir	had	fallen	but	hit	the	man	hard	with	the	spear,	knocking	the	platter	from	its	tip.	As	he
did	so,	he	felt	a	stinging	pain	across	his	cheek.	Hanif	Khan	had	thrown	his	dagger	at	Babur’s	throat	but
missed	his	mark.	Now	Babur	thrust	at	him	with	the	spear	point	and	Hanif	Khan	could	only	half	turn	aside
before	 the	 spear	 caught	 his	 right	 side	 and	 he	 fell	 among	 some	 rough	 cushions	 beside	 the	 table.	 Babur
twisted	out	the	spear	and,	without	a	moment’s	reflection,	jabbed	it	hard	into	his	opponent’s	neck,	pinning
him	to	the	cushions,	which	were	soon	soaked	with	his	pumping	red	blood.
In	no	time,	Wazir	Khan,	Baisanghar	and	the	rest	of	his	men	were	surrounding	Babur	congratulating	him
on	 his	 bravery.	 The	 fort	 was	 theirs.	 He	 had	 taken	 his	 first	 small	 step	 on	 the	 long	 road	 to	 recovering
Ferghana.	Going	outside,	Babur	saw	that	the	snow	was	falling	again,	turning	scarlet	where	it	covered	the
bodies	of	his	enemies.	He	longed	for	the	moment	when	he	could	thrust	his	spear	through	Tambal	as	he	had
just	done	through	his	vassal.

And	so	it	had	begun.	Babur	had	become	a	raider,	attacking	swiftly	and	always	leaving	his	name	scratched
in	blood	on	a	paper	left	stuffed	into	the	gaping	mouth	of	one	of	his	dead	enemies.	And	he	had	done	well.
Gradually	he	had	increased	the	size	of	his	forces,	using	soft	words	and	sweet	promises	as	well	as	harsh
steel	 and	 the	 booty	 from	 his	 raids	 to	 attract	 new	 supporters	 and	 win	 over	 his	 adversaries.	 Within	 just
twenty	 months	 of	 his	 capture	 of	 the	 mud	 fort,	 systematically	 and	 tenaciously,	 small	 fort	 by	 small	 fort,
village	by	village,	he	had	reclaimed	much	of	the	west	of	Ferghana.	His	strategy	was	working.	Tambal	no
longer	dared	stir	very	far	to	the	north	or	west	from	Akhsi	towards	Babur’s	strongholds,	and	Babur	had
become	powerful	enough	to	feel	able	to	issue	demands	to	him.
The	first,	made	six	months	ago	and	often	repeated,	had	been	for	the	release	of	his	grandmother,	mother
and	sister	from	imprisonment	in	Akhsi	in	return	for	a	promise	not	to	attack	the	fortress	until	a	year	had
passed.	Three	months	ago	Tambal	had	sent	messengers	to	Babur	with	oily	assurances	that	Esan	Dawlat,
Kutlugh	Nigar	and	Khanzada	were	all	in	good	health	and	being	treated	with	the	respect	due	to	women	of
the	royal	house.	But	he	had	not	offered	to	let	them	go.
Now	Babur	was	advancing	eastwards	towards	the	town	of	Gava	fifty	miles	away,	recently	refortified
by	 Tambal	 and	 garrisoned	 with	 Chakrak	 mercenaries.	 He	 had	 a	 particular	 score	 to	 settle	 there.	 The
Chakrak	 commander	 of	 its	 garrison	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 first	 to	 pledge	 allegiance	 to	 his	 half-brother
Jahangir	 and	 to	 Tambal	 as	 regent.	 The	 town’s	 capture	 would	 send	 another	 signal	 to	 Tambal	 that	 it	 was
time	to	conciliate	Babur	by	returning	his	family.
Babur	and	his	men	stopped	by	the	bank	of	a	small	river	to	allow	their	horses	to	drink.	As	Babur	was
eating	without	relish	a	hunk	of	sour	cheese,	made	from	mare’s	milk,	he	saw	one	of	his	scouts	approaching
on	 his	 horse.	 To	 Babur’s	 alarm	 a	 body	 was	 strapped	 limp	 across	 his	 saddlebow.	 Running	 towards	 the
man,	Babur	shouted,	‘What	has	happened?	Who	is	this	man?’

‘He	 was	 a	 merchant.	 I	 found	 him	 lying	 half	 alive	 in	 a	 pool	 of	 blood	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 track	 with	 a
sword	slash	across	his	stomach.	I	lifted	him	on	to	my	horse	but	he	died	soon	after.	Before	he	did,	though,
he	 told	 me	 he	 had	 been	 heading	 for	 a	 small	 caravanserai	 about	 ten	 miles	 from	 here	 with	 three	 other
merchants	 when	 about	 two	 hours	 ago	 they	 were	 attacked	 by	 a	 Chakrak	 raiding	 party.	 They	 killed	 his
fellows	and	left	him	for	dead	before	making	off	with	all	the	goods.’
‘We	must	find	the	Chakraks	and	avenge	him	if	we	can.	Send	out	some	of	your	fellow	scouts.’
‘Majesty,	that	may	not	be	necessary.	With	his	last	breath	the	merchant	told	me	that	he’d	overheard	the
Chakraks	talking	of	making	for	the	caravanserai	to	see	if	they	could	find	more	victims	there	.	.	.’
‘In	that	case	we	make	for	the	caravanserai.’

The	singing	was	wild	and	raucous	–	just	like	the	Chakraks	themselves.	Men’s	voices,	slurred	with	drink,
soared	 to	 a	 new	 crescendo,	 belting	 out	 suggestions	 for	 obscene	 actions	 so	 gross	 and	 so	 physically
impossible	that,	despite	himself,	Babur	grinned.	He	glanced	at	Wazir	Khan	–	he	was	smiling	too.
Babur	signalled	to	his	men,	who	were	all	around	him	in	the	long	grass,	and,	like	him,	lying	flat	on	their
stomachs,	to	keep	down	and	wait.	Then	he	wriggled	closer	to	the	single-storey,	mud-brick	caravanserai
overlooking	 a	 ford	 across	 one	 of	 Ferghana’s	 swift-flowing	 rivers	 where	 the	 revellers	 were	 letting
themselves	go.	The	jingling	of	bells	told	him	dancing	girls	were	there.	So	did	a	sudden,	indignant	female
shriek,	followed	by	gusts	of	male	laughter.
It	was	still	only	mid-afternoon,	but	the	twenty	or	so	Chakraks	were	clearly	already	pissed	as	rats.	They
hadn’t	even	troubled	to	tether	their	horses	properly	and	some,	with	matted	manes	and	tails	so	long	they
brushed	 the	 ground,	 had	 already	 trotted	 away.	 As	 for	 their	 booty,	 seized	 from	 the	 four	 merchants,	 they
couldn’t	 even	 be	 bothered	 to	 carry	 it	 inside.	 The	 merchants’	 grey	 pack	 mules,	 roped	 together	 and
contentedly	grazing,	were	still	loaded	with	wicker	panniers	stuffed	with	what	looked	like	furs	and	leather.
All	the	Chakraks	seemed	to	have	taken	inside	were	barrels	of	wine.
Barbarians,	Babur	thought.	They	were	about	to	get	what	was	coming	to	them	and	it	was	a	nice	thought.
Raising	his	head	above	the	long	grasses,	Babur	looked	round	but	could	see	no	one.	Just	as	he’d	thought,
they’d	not	even	the	wit	to	post	a	boy	to	keep	watch	over	the	animals	or	the	bags.	Rising	to	his	feet,	he
crept	towards	what	was	more	of	a	hole	in	the	caravanserai’s	thick	walls	than	a	window,	just	to	the	right	of
the	 low	 entrance,	 and	 peered	 cautiously	 inside.	 The	 room	 was	 bare,	 except	 for	 a	 long	 wooden	 table
pushed	against	the	back	wall,	some	three-legged	stools	and	a	half	broken	bench.	In	the	middle	of	the	room
a	plump,	snub-nosed	girl,	wearing	a	tightly	belted	red-flowered	jacket	over	pale,	baggy	yellow	trousers
with	bells	around	her	ankles	and	her	wrists,	and	another	taller	girl	in	blue	trousers	and	jacket	and	with	a
tambourine	in	her	grubby	hands	were	whirling	and	gyrating,	stamping	their	bare	feet	on	the	flagstone	floor.
As	he	watched,	a	couple	of	Chakraks,	sweaty-faced	under	their	round,	shaggy	sheepskin	hats,	lunged	at
them	 unsteadily,	 grabbing	 unsuccessfully	 for	 a	 breast	 or	 a	 buttock	 and	 tumbling	 to	 the	 floor,	 amid	 the
cheers	of	their	companions.
In	 one	 corner,	 a	 large	 black	 kettle	 was	 suspended	 over	 a	 smoky	 fire.	 In	 another,	 Babur	 watched	 a
Chakrak	 drop	 his	 trousers	 and	 begin	 busily	 defecating,	 his	 comrades	 seemingly	 oblivious	 to	 the	 stink.
Another	got	to	his	feet	and	spewed	an	arc	of	yellow	vomit	before	slumping	down	again,	flicking	a	gobbet
of	sick	from	his	sleeve	with	a	long	fingernail.	Babur	ducked	away	again.	He	had	seen	enough	in	every
sense.
Keeping	low	to	the	ground	again,	he	made	his	way	back	to	Wazir	Khan.	‘They’re	ours	for	the	taking,	the

drunken	fools.	They’ve	even	left	their	shields	and	swords	piled	by	the	door.’
Wazir	Khan	raised	an	eyebrow.	‘Now,	Majesty?’
‘Yes!’
Babur	and	Wazir	Khan	rose	to	their	feet,	signalling	to	their	men	to	do	likewise.	They	had	done	this	so
many	times	before	that	spoken	orders	were	no	longer	needed.	Finger	to	his	lips,	Wazir	Khan	gestured	to
several	men	to	work	their	way	around	the	caravanserai	to	the	back,	in	case	there	were	other	ways	out.
Then	Babur	yelled	his	battle	cry:	‘Ferghana!’
With	Babur	at	their	head,	the	men	burst	in.	Stupid	with	drink	and	taken	by	surprise,	the	Chakraks	put	up
little	resistance.	The	only	blade	that	Babur	faced,	as	he	and	his	men	went	ruthlessly	to	work,	belonged	to
the	snub-nosed	girl.	She	whipped	a	dagger	out	of	her	bodice	and	made	a	spirited	attempt	to	stab	Babur	in
his	arm	but	he	turned	her	wrist	with	its	jingling	bells	with	ease	and,	flicking	her	round,	put	a	boot	to	her
wide	rump	and	sent	her	sprawling.
In	 a	 couple	 of	 minutes	 it	 was	 all	 over	 and	 Babur’s	 men,	 barely	 out	 of	 breath,	 were	 cleaning	 and
sheathing	their	swords.	Not	one	had	been	wounded	–	but	they	were	hardened	warriors,	used	to	fighting
better	men	than	these	drunkards.	‘Take	the	bodies	outside	–	let’s	see	who	we	have,’	Babur	ordered,	and
hurried	out	himself,	glad	to	leave	the	fetid,	smoky	room	for	the	fresh	air.
As	soon	as	his	men	had	hauled	the	dead	Chakraks	out	by	their	boot-clad	feet	and	arranged	them	in	a
line,	Babur	counted	them.	There	were	fifteen.	Many	had	their	throats	slit,	some	were	headless.	His	men
had	also	neatly	arranged	the	severed	heads,	a	few	with	their	shaggy	hats	still	on.	Babur	ran	his	eyes	over
them,	grunting	with	satisfaction	when	he	recognised	a	face.	He	had	vowed	to	kill	every	Chakrak	who	had
betrayed	him	and	each	skirmish	that	brought	him	closer	to	his	goal	was	highly	satisfying.
At	the	sound	of	squealing	Babur	turned.	Two	of	his	warriors	had	each	grabbed	a	dancing	girl	and	were
dragging	them	out	of	the	caravanserai.	‘Do	not	force	them	–	you	know	my	orders.	If	they	will	go	with	you
willingly	for	money,	well,	that	is	another	matter.’	Babur	turned	away.
The	girls	were	indeed	willing	and,	after	a	few	moments	of	brisk	negotiation,	led	the	warriors	into	an
apple	 orchard	 beyond	 the	 caravanserai.	 Babur	 guessed	 they	 were	 the	 daughters	 of	 the	 squint-faced
innkeeper	who,	at	the	first	sign	of	trouble,	had	hidden	himself	under	the	table	and	was	still	there.	Soon	a
regular	procession	of	Babur’s	men	were	making	their	way	to	and	from	the	orchard.	From	the	smiles	on	the
faces	of	those	returning,	it	seemed	that	the	women	were	well	used	to	providing	favours	to	their	father’s
customers.
Wazir	Khan	was	already	organising	the	rounding	up	of	the	Chakrak	ponies	that	had	drifted	off	and	was
checking	 the	 goods	 the	 Chakraks	 had	 looted	 from	 the	 merchants.	 ‘Look,	 Majesty,’	 he	 called	 to	 Babur,
pulling	out	two	brightly	coloured	rugs.	From	their	sheen	the	weavers	had	mixed	silk	with	the	wool	and	the
patterning	was	unusual	–	perhaps	the	merchants	had	been	travelling	from	the	east,	from	Kashgar,	where
the	people	were	skilled	in	such	things.	With	the	furs	and	the	leather,	they	would	fetch	a	good	price,	which
would	help	him	pay	his	men,	Babur	thought,	pleased.
It	 would	 also	 be	 a	 good	 move	 to	 give	 his	 men	 a	 feast.	 They	 had	 done	 well	 and	 he	 must	 show	 his
appreciation.	He	would	hold	it	as	soon	as	they	returned	westward,	back	to	Shahrukiyyah.	There,	in	the
fortress	 he	 had	 seized	 from	 Tambal’s	 forces	 six	 months	 ago	 and	 made	 his	 base,	 they	 would	 toast	 the
memory	of	Ali	Mazid	Beg,	lord	of	Shahrukiyyah	until	his	murder	in	Samarkand.	They	would	also	drink	to
his	 son,	 slain	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 defend	 the	 fortress	 against	 Chakrak	 mercenaries	 despatched	 by	 Tambal	 as
soon	as	he	had	learned	of	Ali	Mazid	Beg’s	death.
At	the	memory	of	his	loyal	chief,	Babur’s	thoughts	grew	sombre	as	they	often	did	these	days.	What	had
he	achieved	in	the	two	years	since	Ali	Mazid	Beg’s	corpse	had	been	hoisted	over	the	Turquoise	Gate?
Was	 he	 any	 closer	 to	 freeing	 his	 family	 or	 to	 regaining	 Ferghana,	 never	 mind	 Samarkand?	 How	 much

longer	could	he	go	on	as	a	king	without	a	kingdom?	It	would	take	time	to	build	an	army	large	enough	to
storm	Akhsi,	liberate	his	womenfolk	and	regain	his	throne.	As	for	Samarkand,	his	brief	days	there	as	ruler
were	just	a	shadowy	memory.	It	was	hard	to	believe	they	had	actually	happened.	The	grand	vizier’s	ghost
had	had	the	last	laugh	after	all.
The	thought	angered	Babur.	He	lashed	out	with	his	foot	at	one	of	the	severed	heads,	sending	it	flying
across	 the	 grass.	 His	 men	 deserved	 some	 fun,	 he	 thought,	 and	 so	 did	 he.	 ‘Cut	 branches	 for	 sticks,’	 he
shouted.	‘Let’s	play	some	polo	with	these	vermin’s	heads.	We’ll	use	the	trees	over	there	for	goals.’
For	an	hour,	he	lost	himself	in	a	wild	game,	swerving	from	side	to	side	on	one	of	the	nimble	Chakrak
ponies	and	whacking	with	the	branches	stripped	of	their	twigs	at	the	severed	heads	so	that	they	bowled
and	 bounced	 through	 the	 grass.	 The	 heads	 were	 soon	 unrecognisable	 –	 features	 smashed,	 eyeballs
tumbling	 out	 –	 and	 Babur	 and	 his	 sweating	 fellow	 players,	 as	 well	 as	 their	 mounts,	 were	 flecked	 with
blood.
Tiring	of	the	sport	at	last	but	having	released	some	of	his	pent-up	anger	and	frustration,	Babur	halted
his	steaming	mount.	Glancing	round	he	caught	Wazir	Khan	watching	him.	For	once	there	was	no	approval
on	his	face.	But	Babur	refused	to	feel	ashamed.	His	enemies	deserved	everything	they	got,	dead	or	alive.
‘Let’s	go,’	he	ordered.	‘It	is	a	long	way	to	Gava	and	we	mustn’t	keep	our	hosts	waiting.’	Kicking	his
horse	so	sharply	that	it	sprang	straight	into	a	gallop,	Babur	rode	from	the	inn	down	towards	the	ford	over
the	river	without	a	backward	glance	at	the	mangled,	bloody	heads	already	being	pecked	at	by	crows	and
the	two	girls	slightly	bow-leggedly	picking	over	the	bodies	of	the	Chakraks	for	anything	Babur’s	men	had
missed	which	they	could	add	to	the	proceeds	of	their	whoredom.

Yellow,	 pink	 and	 white	 flowers	 sprinkled	 the	 bright	 green	 upland	 meadows	 when,	 three	 weeks	 later,
Babur	and	his	men	came	galloping	through	them	towards	Shahrukiyyah.	The	raid	against	Gava	had	been
bloody	 but	 successful.	 Babur	 himself	 had	 shot	 down	 the	 town’s	 commander	 with	 an	 arrow	 despatched
from	 the	 saddle	 at	 a	 distance	 of	 three	 hundred	 yards.	 All	 the	 hours	 of	 practice	 with	 his	 small,	 sharply
curved	double	bow	using	a	bronze	ring	to	protect	his	thumb	as	he	drew	back	the	taut	string	had	paid	off.
He	could	empty	a	quiver	of	thirty	arrows	in	under	a	minute.
After	that,	resistance	had	ceased.	Pissing	themselves	with	fear,	the	garrison	had	surrendered	not	only
themselves	but	also	their	full	war	chest,	whose	contents	now	reposed	in	the	bulging	leather	saddlebags	of
Babur	and	his	men.
Wazir	Khan	would	be	pleased.	Babur	had	been	missing	his	old	friend	but	he	had	injured	his	thigh	after
being	 thrown	 when	 his	 horse	 shied	 at	 a	 snake	 the	 day	 after	 the	 attack	 on	 the	 caravanserai.	 Babur	 had
insisted	he	return	to	Shahrukiyyah	to	rejoin	Baisanghar,	whom	he	had	left	there	in	command.
Tonight	 they	 would	 celebrate,	 he	 would	 decide	 which	 of	 his	 men	 to	 honour	 with	 the	 ulush,	 the
champion’s	portion	awarded	at	feasts	to	the	warriors	who	had	fought	bravest	and	best	–	and	he	would	tell
Wazir	Khan	and	Baisanghar	about	the	raid	on	Gava.	Wazir	Khan	would	laugh	at	his	stories,	and	perhaps
even	the	serious	Baisanghar	might	manage	a	smile.
As	 soon	 as	 he	 entered	 the	 courtyard	 of	 the	 stone	 fortress,	 Babur	 jumped	 down	 from	 his	 horse	 and
looked	 around	 for	 them.	 There	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 Baisanghar	 but	 Wazir	 Khan	 was	 in	 front	 of	 the	 stables
inspecting	a	horse’s	fetlock.	Babur	frowned:	his	friend	was	still	limping	heavily	as	he	came	towards	him.
Then	he	noticed	Wazir	Khan’s	beaming	face.
‘Great	news,	Majesty!	Truly	momentous	news.’

‘What	has	happened?’
‘A	week	ago	a	messenger	came	from	Akhsi,	from	Tambal	speaking,	or	so	he	says,	for	your	half-brother
Jahangir	and	agreeing	to	send	your	mother,	your	grandmother	and	your	sister	to	you.’
‘Did	he	ask	anything	in	return?’
‘Nothing	explicit,	Majesty.	All	he	added	were	fine	words	about	his	respect	for	you.’
Babur’s	 heart	 leaped.	 At	 last.	 The	 knowledge	 that	 his	 family	 would	 soon	 be	 with	 him	 again	 was
overwhelming.
‘When	will	they	be	here?’
‘By	sunset	tomorrow,	if	all	has	gone	well.’
The	next	evening,	in	the	gathering	dusk,	Babur	was	on	the	battlements,	where	he	had	been	for	most	of
the	day,	straining	his	eyes	impatiently	eastward	where	the	road	wound	up	to	a	pass.	At	last,	emerging	from
the	 gathering	 gloom,	 he	 spied	 an	 undulating	 line	 of	 camels	 with	 baskets	 hanging	 at	 either	 side	 of	 them.
Behind	them	rode	the	detachment	of	soldiers	Wazir	Khan	had	sent,	under	Baisanghar,	to	meet	and	protect
the	women	on	the	final	stage	of	their	journey.
Babur	could	not	see	who	was	riding	in	the	baskets,	but	it	must	be	his	family.	Unable	to	contain	himself
any	longer,	and	without	pausing	either	to	summon	guards	to	accompany	him	or	to	have	a	mount	saddled,	he
jumped	on	to	a	horse	and	urged	it	out	over	the	grassy	meadows	towards	the	small	caravan.
Tears	were	flowing	down	his	sunburned	cheeks	but	he	didn’t	care.	There	was	no	one	to	see	them	and,
anyway,	what	did	it	matter?	They	were	tears	of	happiness,	not	of	weakness.	Dashing	them	from	his	cheeks
with	one	hand	as	he	clung	to	his	horse’s	mane	with	the	other,	Babur	urged	the	beast	to	a	pace	so	fast	he
felt	he	was	flying.
Suddenly	 four	 soldiers	 detached	 from	 the	 escort	 and,	 spears	 tilted,	 galloped	 towards	 him.	 Although
Baisanghar	had	probably	guessed	who	was	riding	bareback	so	swiftly	and	wildly	towards	them,	prudent
soldier	that	he	was	he	must	have	ordered	the	men	to	confirm	his	identity.	As	the	riders	drew	near,	Babur
swung	his	own	horse	round	sharply	to	force	it	to	a	standstill.	Lathered	with	sweat,	it	snorted	in	protest.
Babur	threw	back	his	head	and	yelled	his	ancestral	cry.	‘Ferghana!’
The	 riders,	 quite	 close	 enough	 now	 to	 recognise	 him,	 saluted	 and	 Babur	 cantered	 on	 to	 where	 the
camels	had	halted.	If	his	heart	had	not	been	so	full,	there	would	have	been	something	comical	about	the
sight	of	Esan	Dawlat’s	head	poking	out	of	a	pannier	like	a	chicken	being	carried	to	market.	She	was	so
light	that	there	had	been	no	need	to	stuff	the	basket	on	the	other	side	with	anything	heavier	than	cabbages
and	her	lute	which	was	secured	to	the	outside	of	the	basket	with	hide	thongs.	Kutlugh	Nigar	and	Khanzada
were	riding	in	baskets	suspended	on	either	side	of	a	bigger	camel	with	a	creamy,	long-haired	coat	that
spat	 at	 Babur’s	 approach.	 On	 the	 camels	 behind,	 Babur	 recognised	 several	 of	 his	 mother’s	 waiting
women,	including	Fatima,	and	his	vizier,	Kasim.
The	camel	drivers	jumped	down,	tapped	the	camels’	knobbly	knees	with	their	sticks	and	forced	them	to
the	ground.	Remembering	what	was	due	to	age,	Babur	ran	first	to	his	grandmother	and	lifting	her	from	the
basket	 knelt	 before	 her.	 He	 could	 find	 no	 words	 and	 neither,	 for	 once,	 could	 she.	 He	 felt	 her	 hand	 rest
briefly	on	his	head.	As	he	rose	again	and	looked	into	her	small	bright	eyes	he	saw,	to	his	relief,	that	her
spirit	seemed	unquenched.	She	still	looked	what	she	had	always	been,	a	khanim	–	a	woman	of	the	blood
of	Genghis	Khan.
Then	he	turned	to	his	mother,	lifted	her	to	the	ground	and	clung	to	her,	breathing	in	the	familiar	warm
scent	 of	 sandalwood.	 When	 he	 released	 her,	 he	 saw	 tears	 in	 her	 eyes.	 ‘It	 is	 good	 to	 see	 you	 again,	 my
son,’	she	said	simply,	and	a	smile	lit	her	face	that	was	thinner	and	more	lined	than	he	remembered.
Khanzada	had,	by	now,	climbed	from	her	basket	herself	and	she	flung	herself	at	him.	Her	pet	mongoose,
which	 she	 was	 holding	 in	 her	 left	 hand,	 squeaked	 in	 protest.	 Last	 time	 he	 had	 seen	 her	 she	 had	 been	 a

skinny	girl	with	a	few	spots.	Now	she	was	a	woman,	her	body	rounded,	her	face	smooth	and	beautiful	–
but	with	the	same	grin,	he	was	relieved	to	see.	He	hugged	her	then	stepped	back	to	look	at	her	properly.
Khanzada	was	scrutinising	him	too.	‘You’re	taller,’	she	said,	‘and	your	shoulders	are	broader.	And	you
look	terrible.	Your	chin	is	all	stubbly	and	your	hair	is	wild	–	it’s	nearly	as	long	as	mine!	And	look	at	your
nails	–	they’re	black.’
Behind	him,	Babur	heard	Esan	Dawlat	click	her	tongue	in	reproof	at	Khanzada’s	disrespectful	words
and	he	smiled.	They	were	together	again	at	last	and	everything	was	as	it	should	be.	Later,	they	would	talk
and	he	would	learn	all	that	had	happened	to	them,	but	for	now	this	was	enough.
As	they	approached	the	fort,	trumpets	blared	and	drums	thundered	their	welcome	to	the	royal	women	of
Ferghana,	free	at	last	and	–	for	the	moment	at	least	–	safe.
While	the	women	settled	into	the	chambers	Babur	had	ordered	to	be	prepared	for	them	on	the	top	floor
of	the	fortress,	he	summoned	the	cooks	to	check	that	all	was	in	place	for	the	celebration	he	had	planned.	It
would	be	a	far	cry	from	the	magnificence	of	Samarkand,	to	which	he	had	once	hoped	to	welcome	them.
However,	 twenty	 lambs	 had	 been	 slaughtered	 and	 were	 already	 roasting	 over	 fires	 in	 the	 courtyard.
Chickens	 had	 been	 plucked	 and	 drawn	 and	 were	 now	 being	 baked	 in	 butter	 with	 walnuts	 and	 apricots.
Apples	were	being	glazed	with	thick,	golden	honey	and	red	pomegranates	stuffed	with	almond	paste	and
pistachios.	He	was	particularly	pleased	as	he	looked	at	a	pile	of	silvered	almonds	that	his	men	had	seized
during	one	of	their	raids.	Esan	Dawlat	loved	these	more	than	any	other	sweetmeats.
As	the	moon	rose	in	a	clear,	star-lit	sky	and	guards	kept	watch	from	the	fortress	walls	in	case	of	any
sudden	attack,	the	feast	began.	Babur	and	his	men	ate	in	a	long,	low	chamber	on	the	ground	floor	while,	in
their	own	apartments	above,	the	women	were	served	the	choicest	portions.	As	the	candlelight	danced	and
flickered,	one	of	Babur’s	men	began	to	sing	in	a	deep,	rich	voice.	The	others	kept	the	rhythm,	striking	the
hilts	of	their	daggers	on	the	low	wooden	tables	around	which	they	were	seated,	cross-legged.	They	were
happy,	 Babur	 thought.	 The	 release	 of	 the	 women	 had	 pleased	 them	 too.	 It	 had	 wounded	 their	 honour	 as
well	as	his	that	they	had	lacked	the	strength	to	set	them	free.
Babur	tried	to	eat	but	felt	little	appetite.	He	longed	to	withdraw	and	be	private	with	his	mother,	sister
and	 grandmother	 but	 courtesy	 to	 his	 followers	 demanded	 that	 he	 wait.	 The	 singing	 was	 growing	 louder
and	 more	 strident,	 the	 warriors	 roaring	 out	 the	 exploits	 of	 their	 ancestors,	 and	 Babur	 added	 his	 own
voice.	 But	 at	 last,	 as	 some	 slumped	 forward,	 overcome	 by	 strong	 drink,	 and	 others	 staggered	 blearily
from	the	chamber	to	relieve	themselves	in	the	courtyard	outside,	Babur	could	leave	them	and	climb	the
winding	stone	stairs	to	the	women’s	chamber.
Kutlugh	Nigar	held	out	her	arms	to	him	and	he	came	and	sat	by	her	on	the	carpeted	floor.	From	what
remained	on	the	brass	dishes	spread	before	them,	he	could	see	that	they	had	eaten	well.	Yet,	now	that	he
looked	at	their	faces	again,	he	could	see	signs	of	strain.	All	three	were	pale	and	drained	as	if	they	had	not
felt	the	warmth	of	the	sun	or	breathed	fresh	air	for	a	long	time.	Someone	would	pay	for	this	–	in	blood.
But	for	their	sakes	he	mastered	his	feelings.	He	must	show	them	a	calm	face,	whatever	they	told	him.
For	 a	 time	 they	 were	 all	 silent.	 Now	 that	 the	 initial	 euphoria	 had	 passed,	 it	 was	 hard	 for	 anyone	 to
know	where	to	begin.
Finally,	Esan	Dawlat	spoke:	‘So,	Babur,	you	took	Samarkand.’	Her	shrewd	little	face	cracked	into	a
rare	smile.
‘Yes,	but	I	could	not	keep	it.’	Babur	bowed	his	head.	There	was	something	he	must	say.	‘Grandmother,	I
failed	you.	You	wrote	asking	my	help	and	I	could	not	give	it.	I	came	too	late	and	with	too	few	men	to	free
you.’
‘You	did	not	fail	us.	And	it	was	because	of	us	that	you	lost	Samarkand.	You	rode	to	our	help	at	once.
What	more	could	you	have	done?’

Babur	shook	his	head.	‘My	first	duty	was	to	you	and	Ferghana.	In	Samarkand	I	was	like	a	child	with	a
new	toy.	I	thought	of	little	else.	I	should	have	sent	back	Wazir	Khan	to	ensure	that	you	and	Ferghana	were
safe.’	 He	 leaned	 against	 his	 mother	 and	 felt	 her	 fingers	 stroke	 his	 hair	 just	 as	 she	 had	 always	 done.	 It
soothed	him.
‘Tambal	kept	us	well	informed	of	some	things,’	Kutlugh	Nigar	said.	‘I	think	it	amused	him.	We	learned,
of	 course,	 of	 your	 cousin	 Mahmud’s	 treachery	 –	 that	 it	 was	 he	 who	 took	 Samarkand	 from	 you.	 He	 and
Tambal	 set	 a	 trap	 for	 you,	 my	 son.	 They	 agreed	 that	 in	 Ferghana	 Tambal	 would	 depose	 you	 and	 put
Jahangir	in	your	place,	knowing	that	this	would	bring	you	–	and	many	of	your	troops	–	back	to	Ferghana
and	Mahmud	would	have	his	chance.	You	were	such	a	new	lord	of	Samarkand	–	they	say	its	nobles	felt	no
allegiance	to	you	so	it	was	easy	for	Mahmud	and	his	young	vixen	of	a	wife,	the	grand	vizier’s	daughter,	to
bribe	them.’
Babur	closed	his	eyes	at	the	confirmation	of	his	worst	suspicions.	What	a	naïve	fool	he	had	been.
‘You	should	know,	too,	it	was	Mahmud’s	wife	who	demanded	Ali	Mazid	Beg’s	death.’	Esan	Dawlat’s
voice	was	bitter.	The	chieftain’s	mother	had	been	her	friend	and	she	had	been	fond	of	him.	‘She	said	that
if	 she	 could	 not	 have	 your	 head,	 his	 would	 have	 to	 do	 in	 the	 meantime	 –	 in	 vengeance	 for	 her	 father.
Mahmud	could	not	deny	her.	They	say	she	is	the	real	ruler	of	Samarkand,	greedier	and	more	vindictive
even	than	her	father	was.’
Babur	blinked	in	surprise.	He	had	not	thought	the	slender	young	woman	who	had	begged	bravely	for	the
grand	vizier’s	life	could	be	so	cold-blooded	and	ruthless.	One	day	she	would	answer	for	her	spite	but	that
could	wait.	Now	there	were	other	things	he	must	know,	and	come	to	terms	with.
Gently	he	took	his	mother’s	hand	between	his	own.	‘Tell	me	about	yourselves.	How	did	they	treat	you
during	your	imprisonment?’
‘We	were	closely	confined	with	just	a	few	attendants	but	we	were	afforded	the	dignity	due	to	our	rank
and	lineage.	Tambal	did	not	threaten	or	insult	us,’	his	mother	said,	‘and	recently	–	presumably	when	he
heard	of	your	successes	–	he	gave	us	more	spacious	apartments.’
‘And	he	would	not	allow	Roxanna	to	take	our	jewels,	though	they	say	she	screamed	and	raged	and	even
though	she	shares	his	bed,’	Esan	Dawlat	added,	with	contempt.
‘And	my	half-brother,	Jahangir?	What’s	been	his	role	in	all	this?’	Babur	had	often	thought	about	the	boy
who	had	supplanted	him	and	whom	he	had	never	even	seen.	When	Babur	had	last	been	at	Akhsi,	preparing
for	his	attempt	on	Samarkand,	the	brat	had	been	sick.
‘He	is	a	pawn	and	often	ill.	Tambal	has	only	a	few	spoonfuls	of	royal	blood	in	his	veins	so	he	could
never	 claim	 the	 throne	 himself	 –	 the	 other	 chiefs	 wouldn’t	 let	 him.	 But	 as	 Jahangir’s	 regent	 he	 has	 the
power	he	craves,’	Esan	Dawlat	said	shortly.	‘Now	he	fears	you.	Why	else	should	he	release	us	if	not	to
appease	you?’
Babur	 thought	 back	 to	 his	 own	 early	 days	 as	 king,	 remembering	 how	 Tambal	 had	 tried	 to	 sow	 doubt
among	the	other	leaders.	All	the	time	he	had	had	his	own	ambitions.	What	an	opportunist	the	man	was	–
too	astute	to	join	in	with	Qambar-Ali’s	schemes	and	patient	enough	to	wait	for	his	moment.	Was	that	why
he	 had	 encouraged	 Babur	 twice	 to	 attack	 Samarkand?	 He	 could	 still	 recall	 the	 shining	 eagerness	 in
Tambal’s	 eyes	 when	 Baisanghar	 had	 brought	 Timur’s	 ring.	 He	 also	 remembered	 how	 quickly	 after	 the
capture	of	Samarkand	Tambal	had	returned	to	Ferghana.
‘The	worst	thing	for	us	was	not	knowing	for	so	many	months	what	had	happened	to	you.	Fatima	–	you
know	what	a	gossip	she	is	–	brought	us	a	tale	–	no	more	than	a	rumour	but	enough	to	frighten	us	–	that	you
had	fallen	ill	and	died	on	the	road	back	to	Ferghana.’	His	mother’s	voice	trembled.	‘But	then	we	began	to
hear	stories	that	you	were	alive	and	hiding	in	the	hills.	We	didn’t	know	whether	it	was	true	until	Tambal
himself	 came	 to	 us	 in	 a	 rage	 .	 .	 .	 He	 told	 us	 you	 were	 attacking	 villages,	 destroying,	 pillaging	 and

slaughtering,	giving	no	quarter.’
‘So	 it	 is	 true,	 is	 it,	 Babur,	 what	 Tambal	 said?	 That	 you	 have	 become	 a	 common	 bandit	 and	 cattlerustler?’	Esan	Dawlat	looked	thoroughly	approving.
Babur	nodded	and	after	a	moment	grinned	at	his	grandmother.	Sometimes	he	had	worried	what	she	and
his	 mother	 would	 think	 of	 him,	 whether	 they	 would	 understand	 how	 a	 prince	 could	 embrace,	 indeed
relish,	the	life	of	a	mountain	brigand.
‘Tell	us	about	it,	Babur.’
As	the	sputtering	tallow	candles	burned	low,	Babur	tried	to	conjure	for	them	what	his	life	had	been.
The	 excitement	 as,	 with	 his	 band	 of	 two	 or	 three	 hundred	 adventurers,	 he	 had	 swooped	 down	 from	 the
hills.	The	exhilaration	of	night-time	hit	and	run	raids	on	forts	held	by	Tambal’s	forces	and	the	elation	of
vanishing	into	the	night,	the	dripping	heads	of	his	victims	lashed	to	his	saddle.	The	nightlong	carousing
when	his	head	spun	from	drinking	kvass,	fermented	mare’s	milk,	prepared	by	one	of	his	men	according	to
an	old	Mongol	recipe.	The	only	thing	he	left	out	was	the	wild	polo	games	played	with	Chakrak	heads	–
though	he	might	tell	Khanzada	later.
Khanzada’s	eyes	were	shining	as	he	talked,	her	fists	clenching	and	unclenching	as	if	she	saw	herself
there,	fighting	side	by	side	with	him.	Esan	Dawlat	was	also	rapt,	but	he	noticed	his	mother	frown	as	he
described	times	when	he’d	been	just	a	heartbeat	from	death.
‘But	I	only	attacked	those	who	had	betrayed	me.	And	I	never	forgot	you.	Your	freedom	–	not	my	throne
–	was	what	I	wanted	most.’	Glancing	round,	Babur	saw	that	a	shaft	of	pale,	grey	light	was	already	seeping
through	the	narrow	slit	of	window.	It	was	almost	day.
‘You	have	achieved	it.	But	what	is	past	is	past.	Now	we	must	look	to	the	future.’	Esan	Dawlat’s	tone
was	brisk	and	the	look	in	her	eyes	as	they	rested	on	him	made	him	feel	uncomfortably	like	a	child	about	to
be	 quizzed	 by	 his	 teacher.	 ‘What	 have	 you	 learned,	 Babur?’	 She	 leaned	 towards	 him	 and	 grasped	 his
wrist.	‘What	have	your	“throneless	days”	as	you	call	them	taught	you?’
It	was	a	good	question.	What	had	he	learned	during	these	desperate,	dangerous	times?
‘The	importance	of	trustworthy	friends	and	allies,’	he	said	at	last,	‘and	the	ability	to	reward	them	well.
Also	the	need	for	a	clear	objective,	a	single-minded	strategy,	and	the	determination	to	let	nothing	stand	in
the	way	of	it.’
Esan	Dawlat	nodded.	‘Of	course.	And	what	else?’
‘I’ve	learned	that	a	ruler	cannot	always	be	merciful	but	needs	to	be	stern	–	sometimes	even	harsh	–	to
earn	respect.	Otherwise	he	may	seem	weak,	more	eager	to	be	loved	than	to	lead,	and	hence	prey	to	any
smooth-tongued	 schemer.	 I’ve	 learned	 that	 to	 win	 loyalty	 you	 must	 inspire	 not	 only	 admiration	 and
gratitude	but	also	a	little	fear.	I	should	have	had	Baqi	Beg,	Baba	Qashqa	and	Yusuf	executed	when	I	first
came	to	rule	Ferghana,	rather	than	merely	depriving	them	of	their	positions,	and	leaving	them	living	and
festering	with	resentment.	Also,	I	should	have	made	an	example	of	some	of	the	grand	vizier’s	supporters
on	capturing	Samarkand.
‘Above	all,	I	have	appreciated	the	duty	never	to	forget	my	destiny.	It’s	only	now	after	everything	that’s
happened	 to	 me	 –	 to	 us	 –	 that	 I’m	 finally	 beginning	 to	 understand	 the	 man	 that	 Timur	 really	 was.	 How
alone	he	must	have	felt	sometimes	.	.	.	how	difficult	he	must	have	found	it	to	make	his	decisions	work.
After	all,	across	the	long	years	he	alone	always	had	to	take	responsibility	for	them	.	.	.	I’ve	learned	the
courage	to	command	too	.	.	.	No	matter	how	many	good	counsellors,	like	Wazir	Khan,	I	have,	only	I	can
decide	my	fate.’
Babur	raised	his	face	to	his	grandmother’s.	‘I	will	be	like	Timur,	I	swear	it	.	.	.’
‘Fine	words,	indeed,’	said	Esan	Dawlat.	‘Now,	let’s	get	down	to	business.	A	new	day	dawns.’

	
	
	

Chapter	8
The	Bridegroom
	

Esan	Dawlat	looked	satisfied	as	with	her	thin,	veiny	little	hand	she	smoothed	the	parchment	on	which
Babur’s	 scribe	 had	 sketched	 an	 outline	 of	 Ferghana.	 The	 drawing	 was	 crude,	 depicting	 the	 Jaxartes
flowing	on	a	straight	east-west	axis	instead	of	showing	how	its	cold	waters	curled	through	wide	valleys
and	 down	 rolling	 hills	 as	 they	 flowed	 from	 the	 snow-tipped	 mountains	 in	 the	 northeast.	 But	 that	 was
irrelevant.	 What	 mattered	 were	 the	 pleasing	 numbers	 of	 towns	 and	 villages,	 marked	 with	 dots	 of
vermilion	ink,	that	Babur	now	controlled.
Two	years	of	confinement	had	not	dulled	his	grandmother’s	knowledge	of	the	political	alliances	of	the
nobles	of	Ferghana,	their	weaknesses	and	ambitions.	Esan	Dawlat	still	knew	all	there	was	to	know	about
the	 complex	 blood	 lines	 and	 loyalties.	 But,	 above	 all,	 she	 seemed	 able	 to	 see	 into	 men’s	 minds,	 to
understand	their	foibles,	vanities	and	weaknesses	and	how	best	to	exploit	them.	With	her	guidance,	Babur
had	developed	skills	in	persuasion,	not	to	say	manipulation,	that	he’d	not	known	he	possessed,	coaxing
several	important	chieftains	to	his	cause.	Others,	sensing	how	the	balance	of	advantage	was	shifting,	had
followed,	calculating	that	even	if	Babur	could	not	reward	them	immediately,	the	time	would	come	when
he	could	and	richly.
With	 his	 burgeoning	 political	 acumen	 and	 his	 increasing	 armies,	 Babur	 had	 been	 pushing	 steadily
eastwards.	Over	the	last	six	months,	the	fortresses	of	Sokh,	Kassan	and	Karnon	had	all	fallen	to	him,	the
latter	 two	 without	 a	 fight,	 and	 at	 last	 he	 was	 closing	 in	 on	 Akhsi.	 It	 wouldn’t	 be	 long	 before	 he	 could
depose	 Jahangir	 and	 once	 again	 call	 himself	 King	 of	 Ferghana,	 he	 was	 sure	 of	 it.	 But	 he	 must	 curb	 his
impatience	until	winter	was	over,	he	told	himself,	biting	his	lip	as	he	considered	the	map.	Little	moved	on
the	 frozen	 landscape	 –	 only	 the	 odd	 fox	 or	 deer	 darting	 hither	 and	 thither	 in	 search	 of	 food	 and	 kites
hovering	in	the	icy	skies	as	they	kept	watch	for	an	unwary	mouse.	It	was	no	time	for	campaigning,	with
icicles	hanging	from	the	battlements	and	the	air	so	cold	it	hurt	a	man	to	breathe.
‘Babur,	pay	attention.	There	is	something	I	need	to	discuss	with	you.	Your	mother	and	I	are	agreed	that
it	is	time	you	were	married.	You	are	seventeen	years	old.	But,	more	important	than	that,	the	right	match
will	strengthen	your	position.’
Esan	Dawlat	was	looking	at	him	triumphantly.	‘It	has	all	been	arranged	–	in	principle,	at	least.	Your
mother	 and	 I	 started	 to	 plan	 while	 we	 were	 captive.	 As	 soon	 as	 we	 were	 freed,	 I	 began	 to	 sound	 out
potential	alliances	for	you,	and	two	days	ago	a	messenger	brought	me	good	news.	The	offer	of	marriage
that,	above	all,	I	hoped	would	prosper	has	been	accepted.	If	you	are	content	–	and	I	can’t	think	of	a	reason
in	 the	 world	 why	 you	 shouldn’t	 be	 delighted	 –	 you	 may	 ride	 to	 claim	 your	 bride	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 snows
begin	to	melt.’
Babur	stared	at	her,	open-mouthed,	unable	to	think	of	any	response	–	not	even	to	ask	who	the	girl	was
that	his	masterful	grandmother	had	so	thoughtfully	obtained	for	him.

The	 air	 was	 still	 cold,	 but	 the	 patches	 of	 bright	 green	 beyond	 the	 walls	 of	 Shahrukiyyah	 were	 growing
bigger	 as	 winter	 retreated.	 The	 excitement	 in	 the	 women’s	 quarters	 was	 unbearable	 –	 Khanzada	 in
particular	could	talk	of	nothing	but	his	coming	marriage,	Babur	thought	moodily,	as	he	walked	across	the
courtyard	from	the	stables	where	he	had	been	inspecting	his	horses.	Their	winter	feed	had	left	them	thin
and	 irritable.	 The	 hoofmarks	 where	 they’d	 kicked	 at	 the	 wooden	 slats	 penning	 them	 in	 showed	 their
impatience	to	be	galloping	over	the	hills	again.	Babur	sympathised.	He	felt	exactly	the	same.
In	fact,	he	felt	more	than	impatient.	He	was	angry.	Members	of	royal	houses	married	for	political,	not
personal,	 reasons	 and	 alliances	 were	 important	 –	 he	 had	 known	 that	 since	 boyhood.	 Even	 as	 a	 baby,
potential	betrothals	had	been	spoken	of	for	him,	some	even	formalised.	But	with	his	father’s	death	and	the
ebb	and	flow	of	his	fortunes,	they	had	fallen	away.	Since	then,	he	had	assumed	that	when	the	time	came	to
take	 a	 wife	 he	 would	 settle	 matters	 for	 himself.	 Instead,	 his	 grandmother	 and	 mother	 were	 treating	 him
like	a	callow	youth,	not	a	king,	arranging	things	slyly	between	themselves	and	presenting	him	with	a	fait
accompli.	Esan	Dawlat	seemed	to	expect	to	be	congratulated	whereas,	much	as	he	loved	and	respected
her,	he	felt	like	wringing	her	neck.
But	seeing	his	mother’s	quiet	joy,	after	all	she	had	been	through,	and	listening	to	her	explain	that	her
marriage	with	his	father	had	been	arranged	solely	for	political	reasons	but	had	turned	into	a	perfect	union,
Babur	couldn’t	see	how	he	could	protest.	And	at	heart	he	knew	he	shouldn’t.	The	two	women	were	right:
he	 needed	 the	 extra	 support	 a	 strong	 alliance	 sealed	 by	 marriage	 would	 bring.	 The	 pair	 had,	 as	 all	 his
advisers	 insisted,	 chosen	 and	 negotiated	 well,	 even	 if	 they	 had	 taken	 his	 name	 in	 vain	 in	 the	 process.
Wazir	Khan’s	smile	and	lack	of	surprise	when	Babur	told	him	what	was	planned	betrayed	more	than	a	hint
that	he,	at	least,	had	been	consulted	at	an	early	stage.
In	just	a	few	days,	he	would	have	to	set	out	for	the	province	of	Zaamin,	seven	days’	ride	to	the	southwest	on	the	southern	borders	of	Ferghana,	where	the	marriage	was	to	take	place.	The	bride	they	had	found
for	him	was	Ayisha,	eldest	daughter	of	Ibrahim	Saru,	the	leader	of	the	Mangligh	clan	and	ruler	of	Zaamin.
Ayisha	was	two	years	his	senior.	What	would	she	look	like?	Would	she	have	the	fine-boned	grace	of	the
grand	 vizier’s	 daughter,	 or	 had	 they	 found	 him	 a	 foul-breathed	 camel?	 Babur	 shrugged.	 The	 important
thing	was	that	Ibrahim	Saru	was	a	powerful	chieftain	who,	until	this	moment,	had	shrewdly	taken	no	side.
From	now	on	his	troops	–	especially	his	renowned	crossbowmen	–	would	be	at	Babur’s	command	in	his
campaign	to	revive	his	fortunes.	In	view	of	that,	as	Esan	Dawlat	kept	telling	him,	it	mattered	little	what
the	 girl	 looked	 like.	 His	 young	 blood	 would	 allow	 him	 to	 fulfil	 his	 nocturnal	 duties	 more	 than
satisfactorily	and,	of	course,	he	could	take	more	wives	or	concubines	later.
As	Babur	entered	his	mother’s	apartments,	there	was	no	sign	of	either	Kutlugh	Nigar	or	Esan	Dawlat
but	Khanzada	was	on	her	knees,	picking	through	some	trinkets	she	had	tipped	from	a	little	wooden	casket
on	to	the	floor.	‘Shall	I	give	these	to	Ayisha?	Do	you	think	she’d	like	them?’	She	held	out	a	pair	of	long
filigree	earrings,	the	fine	gold	wire	studded	with	tiny	red	rubies	and,	at	the	bottom,	a	row	of	pearls	that
trembled.
‘As	you	wish.’	Babur	shrugged.	His	own	gifts	to	his	bride	–	rolls	of	flowered	silk,	sacks	of	spices,	a
set	of	heavy	gold	necklets	and	armlets	that	had	belonged	to	the	royal	house	of	Ferghana	for	centuries	–	had
been	 selected	 by	 his	 mother	 and	 grandmother	 and	 sent	 to	 Zaamin	 three	 weeks	 ago	 under	 escort.	 To	 his
prospective	father-in-law	he	had	sent	gold	coins,	a	fine	stud	ram	and	a	pair	of	perfectly	matched	black
stallions	with	white	fetlocks	that	had	cost	him	a	pang	to	part	with.
The	bride	price	Babur	had	paid	was	all	he	could	afford	in	his	current	circumstances.	It	wasn’t	much	for
a	chieftain	of	Ibrahim	Saru’s	standing.	Babur	wondered	again	why	he	had	agreed	to	the	marriage.	He	must
believe	 that	 Babur	 would	 not	 be	 long	 without	 a	 throne.	 Doubtless	 he	 would	 like	 to	 see	 his	 daughter	 a
queen	and	to	be	grandfather	to	Babur’s	heirs.	And	who	could	blame	him?	Ambition	was	a	fine	thing.

‘Or	perhaps	these?’	Khanzada’s	dark	hair	tumbled	around	her	as	she	continued	to	search	through	her
jewels.
Suddenly	 Babur	 was	 ashamed	 of	 himself.	 Khanzada	 had	 had	 little	 to	 enjoy	 in	 recent	 times,	 it	 should
please	 him	 to	 see	 her	 so	 happy	 for	 him	 –	 and	 so	 generous	 and	 open-hearted.	 Also,	 she	 was	 older	 than
Ayisha	–	they	should	be	thinking	about	a	husband	for	her.	When	he	was	again	King	of	Ferghana	he	would
arrange	 a	 good	 match	 for	 her,	 he	 promised	 himself,	 and	 consult	 her	 about	 it	 more	 than	 he	 had	 been
consulted	about	his	own	marriage.
Two	weeks	later,	Babur	watched	as,	wrapped	in	fur-lined	cloaks	 against	 the	 still	 biting	 winds,	 Esan
Dawlat,	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 and	 Khanzada	 climbed	 into	 a	 high-wheeled,	 covered	 bullock	 cart.	 It	 was	 well
lined	with	cushions	and	sheepskins,	while	crimson	leather	hangings	screened	them	from	public	view.	The
horns	 of	 the	 four	 white	 bullocks	 pulling	 it	 had	 been	 gilded,	 and	 the	 yokes	 above	 their	 broad,	 muscular
necks	were	painted	blue	and	gold.
Babur	mounted	his	favourite	horse,	a	dark-maned	chestnut,	which,	sensing	the	excitement,	skittered	and
pranced.	It	felt	good	to	be	in	the	saddle	again	and	Babur	gave	the	horse	an	affectionate	slap	on	its	shining
neck.	He	had	ordered	Baisanghar	to	remain	at	Shahrukiyyah	with	a	strong	garrison	while	he	took	Wazir
Khan	and	an	escort	of	five	hundred	well-armed	men	with	him.	News	of	the	wedding	would	have	spread
and	eyes	–	some	hostile	–	would	be	observing	their	progress	as	they	passed	southwards	towards	Zaamin.
But	with	a	force	of	that	size	and	teams	of	scouts	and	outriders,	Babur	was	satisfied	there	was	little	risk	of
an	ambush.
Wazir	Khan	had	been	exchanging	some	final	words	with	Baisanghar	on	the	wall	above	the	gatehouse.
Now	 he	 began	 to	 make	 his	 way	 down	 the	 steep,	 uneven	 stairs	 to	 the	 courtyard,	 where	 a	 groom	 was
struggling	to	keep	hold	of	his	horse	as	it	stamped	and	snorted	with	pent-up	energy.	With	what	difficulty
Wazir	 Khan	 was	 moving	 compared	 to	 even	 a	 year	 ago,	 Babur	 thought.	 He	 would	 take	 that	 limp	 to	 the
grave.
At	 last,	 with	 the	 bullock	 cart	 trundling	 behind,	 Babur	 and	 Wazir	 Khan	 rode	 slowly	 down	 the	 castle
ramp	 and	 out	 into	 the	 meadow	 beyond,	 where	 the	 escort	 was	 already	 waiting	 with	 the	 supply	 wagons
drawn	by	mules	carrying	the	tents,	food	and	the	equipment	they	would	need	to	make	camp.	And,	of	course,
the	 chests	 of	 wedding	 clothes	 and	 yet	 further	 gifts	 for	 his	 new	 wife’s	 family,	 including	 a	 yellow-eyed
hawk	for	his	father-in-law.
As	 the	 procession	 wound	 its	 way	 slowly	 south,	 it	 was	 some	 time	 before	 the	 farewell	 salute	 of	 the
drums	on	the	battlements	of	Shahrukiyyah	finally	faded	to	be	replaced	by	the	creaking	of	wood,	the	rumble
of	 wheels,	 the	 jingling	 of	 harnesses,	 the	 grunting	 of	 pack	 animals	 and	 a	 new	 rhythm	 of	 many	 hoofs
thudding	on	soft	spring	turf.
Every	 day,	 the	 cordon	 of	 warriors	 posted	 by	 Wazir	 Khan	 around	 the	 convoy	 kept	 careful	 watch,	 but
nothing	stirred	in	the	quiet	valleys	and	meadows	except	flocks	of	sheep,	the	ewes	swollen-bellied	with
the	lambs	that	would	soon	be	born.	Sometimes,	restless	at	the	slow	pace	and	nervous	at	what	lay	ahead,
Babur	galloped	off	with	a	small	escort.
He	enjoyed	the	sting	of	the	wind	on	his	face.	He	hadn’t	felt	this	free	since	before	his	father	had	died.	At
this	moment,	the	loss	of	Samarkand,	the	betrayal	in	Ferghana	didn’t	seem	to	matter	so	much.	The	burden	of
his	responsibilities	–	his	obligations	to	others,	duties	to	be	fulfilled	and	ambitions	to	be	achieved	–	which
at	 times	 oppressed	 him	 –	 seemed	 to	 roll	 away.	 It	 was	 like	 the	 coming	 of	 spring	 when,	 after	 months	 of
being	 enveloped	 in	 heavy	 sheepskins,	 he	 could	 shrug	 them	 off	 and	 feel	 the	 warm	 sun	 on	 his	 back.
Crouching	low	over	his	horse’s	neck,	Babur	allowed	his	mind	to	go	blank,	blotting	out	all	the	things	that	–
at	this	moment	–	he	just	didn’t	want	to	think	about.
On	 the	 afternoon	 of	 the	 sixth	 day,	 when	 Babur	 was	 again	 riding	 sedately	 beside	 the	 bullock	 cart	 and

they	were	approaching	the	lower	slopes	of	a	hill,	a	line	of	dark-robed	riders	appeared	on	the	skyline.	At
once	Wazir	Khan	raised	his	leather-gauntleted	hand	to	signal	a	halt.
‘What	do	you	think,	Wazir	Khan?	Is	it	them?	The	Manglighs?’	Babur	squinted,	but	couldn’t	make	out
any	distinguishing	features	–	no	banners	no	flags.	The	riders	were	sitting	very	still,	just	watching.
‘Probably,	Majesty.	We	must	be	approaching	the	borders	of	their	territories.	But	we	should	see	what
our	advance	guard	report.’
‘Yes.	Also,	send	out	further	scouts	and	draw	the	convoy	into	a	defensive	position.’
Babur	 watched	 the	 dozen	 warriors	 picked	 out	 by	 Wazir	 Khan	 gallop	 off,	 swords	 at	 their	 sides,
battleaxes	 strapped	 to	 their	 saddlebags	 but	 within	 easy	 reach,	 and	 left	 arms	 thrust	 through	 the	 leather
straps	of	their	round	shields	that,	till	now,	had	been	tied	to	their	backs.	The	last	two	were	also	carrying
spears.	It	was	as	well	to	be	prepared.	Realising	that	the	women	must	be	wondering	what	was	going	on,
Babur	 trotted	 over	 to	 the	 bullock	 cart	 and,	 leaning	 from	 his	 horse,	 thrust	 his	 head	 inside	 the	 leather
curtains.	‘There	are	riders	ahead,	probably	Ibrahim	Saru’s	men	but	we	must	be	certain.	We	are	waiting	for
our	 scouts	 to	 return	 but	 in	 the	 meantime	 we	 are	 making	 ready	 to	 defend	 ourselves.’	 His	 mother	 and
Khanzada	were	dozing	but	Esan	Dawlat,	bright-eyed	and	alert,	nodded.	‘It	is	well.	Take	no	chances.’
In	a	matter	of	minutes,	Wazir	Khan	had	sent	archers	to	conceal	themselves	behind	trees	and	rocks,	had
the	 supply	 wagons	 drawn	 in	 a	 circle	 around	 the	 bullock	 cart	 and	 had	 positioned	 the	 remainder	 of	 the
troops	in	a	defensive	perimeter	around	them.	But,	as	they	waited,	time	seemed	to	pass	so	slowly.	Babur
strained	 his	 ears,	 trying	 to	 catch	 any	 sound	 borne	 on	 the	 wind.	 There	 was	 nothing	 until	 a	 discordant
jangling	 of	 bells	 announced	 the	 arrival	 of	 a	 herd	 of	 shaggy	 goats	 on	 the	 hillside	 above	 them.	 The	 boy
driving	them	took	one	horrified	look	at	what	he	had	stumbled	on	and,	waving	his	staff,	hastily	kicked	and
drove	his	goats	out	of	sight	again.
At	 last	 Babur’s	 men	 came	 galloping	 back.	 Behind	 them	 were	 the	 dark-clad	 riders,	 faces	 swathed
against	the	wind.	All	must	be	well.	As	the	riders	came	closer,	Babur	saw	on	one	of	their	pennants	the	red
hawk	that	was	the	symbol	of	the	Manglighs.	He	rode	a	few	paces	forward,	then	reined	in	his	chestnut	and
waited	for	the	strangers	to	approach.
‘Greetings,	Babur	of	Ferghana.’	The	leading	rider	bent	forward	in	his	saddle	by	way	of	salute.	As	the
powerfully	built	man	unwound	his	black	face-cloth,	Babur	saw	his	thick	dark	beard,	wide	cheekbones	and
above	 them	 a	 pair	 of	 penetrating,	 very	 long	 dark	 eyes,	 strangely	 flecked	 with	 amber.	 He	 looked	 about
forty.	‘I	am	Ibrahim	Saru,	chieftain	of	the	Manglighs.	I	bid	you	and	your	family	welcome.	Today	you	are
my	 guests	 and	 tomorrow,	 Babur,	 you	 will	 become	 my	 son.’	 Though	 he	 spoke	 Turki,	 the	 language	 of
Babur’s	 people,	 his	 accent	 made	 the	 words	 sound	 strange.	 The	 Manglighs	 had	 originally	 come	 from
Persia	–	perhaps	Persian	was	still	their	native	tongue.
Babur	returned	the	bow.	‘Thank	you.	You	honour	us.’
‘Our	encampment	is	two	hours	south	from	here.	We	have	been	waiting	and	watching	for	you.	I	came	in
person	because	I	wished	to	be	the	first	to	greet	you.’
Babur	bowed	again	and	kicking	his	horse	followed	Ibrahim	Saru	slowly	up	the	hill.

The	round	tent	in	which	he	had	spent	the	night	was	quite	well	furnished,	Babur	thought	critically,	his	gaze
wandering	over	the	red	and	blue	woven	hangings	that	covered	the	ten-foot-high	walls	of	stitched,	cured
hides.	 Candles	 burned	 in	 brass	 holders	 cast	 to	 resemble	 coiled	 snakes,	 their	 bases	 set	 with	 chunks	 of
gold-speckled	 lapis-lazuli.	 The	 soft	 dark	 blue	 cushions	 on	 which	 Babur	 was	 resting	 his	 head	 were

embroidered	with	thick	gold	thread	that	tickled	the	back	of	his	neck,	and	his	mattress	was	a	sumptuous
bag	of	what	felt	like	duck	down,	covered	in	a	thick,	slippery	brocade.	The	tent	floor	was	spread	with	furs.
It	was	crude,	of	course,	compared	with	Samarkand,	but	Ibrahim	Saru	had	gone	to	great	trouble	to	set	up
such	an	elaborate	camp	to	which	to	welcome	his	guests.	The	night	before,	as	they	had	ridden	in,	the	lines
of	tents	–	pennants	in	the	yellow	of	Ferghana	flying	from	those	set	up	for	Babur’s	men	and,	in	their	centre,
his	own	much	larger	ceremonial	tent	–	had	been	an	impressive	sight.	No	doubt	exactly	as	Ibrahim	Saru
had	intended.
From	the	light	creeping	in	through	the	entrance	flaps,	closed	with	engraved	metal	clasps,	Babur	guessed
it	must	be	well	past	dawn.	He	thought	back	to	last	night’s	feast	of	buttered	rice,	lamb,	root	vegetables	and
heady	liquor	in	Ibrahim	Saru’s	tented	audience	chamber	with	its	elaborate	awnings	and	carpeted	walkway
leading	to	the	entrance.	Babur	would	much	rather	have	spent	the	evening	with	Esan	Dawlat,	Kutlugh	Nigar
and	 his	 sister	 in	 the	 women’s	 tents	 but,	 of	 course,	 that	 had	 been	 impossible.	 Instead	 he	 had	 politely
watched	 the	 antics	 of	 jugglers,	 fire-eaters	 and	 supplelimbed	 acrobats,	 and	 the	 gyrations	 of	 a	 troupe	 of
plump	dancing	girls	whose	eyes	had	looked	boldly	into	his	as	they	shook	their	full	breasts	and	hips.	Later,
he	 had	 sat	 smiling	 as	 his	 own	 and	 Ibrahim’s	 men	 had	 danced	 and	 sung	 together,	 pledging	 each	 other’s
health	as	the	brothers-in-arms	they	were	soon	to	be,	until	eventually,	fuddled	with	wine,	they	had	slumped
to	the	floor	to	sleep.
Babur,	who	could	usually	drink	as	much	as	any	man,	had	drunk	little,	hoping	that	Ibrahim	Saru	would
talk	to	him	of	their	coming	alliance.	There	was	much	to	discuss.	With	his	father-in-law’s	help,	he	could
storm	Akhsi	and	regain	his	throne	in	weeks,	not	months,	he	was	sure.	Then	there	was	the	small	matter	of
throwing	 his	 cousin	 Mahmud	 out	 of	 Samarkand.	 But	 Ibrahim	 Saru	 had	 made	 only	 polite	 small-talk	 and
Babur	 deciding	 it	 would	 be	 discourteous	 to	 talk	 of	 war	 on	 such	 an	 occasion	 had	 reluctantly	 curbed	 his
tongue.
Throwing	back	the	fur	coverlet,	beneath	which	he	had	slept	only	fitfully,	Babur	got	up.	At	this	thought
of	 what	 lay	 ahead	 he	 allowed	 himself	 a	 quick	 sigh.	 He	 felt	 impatient	 with	 himself	 as	 well	 as	 with	 his
situation.	At	this	moment	he’d	have	given	anything	to	be	leading	his	men	into	combat	rather	than	having	to
marry	an	unknown	young	woman.	But	he	was	a	king,	a	conqueror,	a	warrior,	and	he	was	also	now	a	man.
How	often	during	his	wild	days	had	he	not	lain	at	night	on	hard	ground	beneath	cold	skies	thinking	of	the
soft,	warm	bodies	of	women?
Why	had	he	not	summoned	one	to	him?	He	couldn’t	say	for	certain.	Perhaps	it	was	the	prudishness	of
an	only	son	who	lacked	a	father.	Perhaps	a	disinclination	to	father	a	child	in	his	circumstances?	Perhaps	a
consciousness	 of	 his	 dignity	 preventing	 him	 associating	 with	 the	 available	 women	 or	 a	 wish	 not	 to	 let
such	women	get	close	to	him	–	other	princes	before	him	had	been	ruled	and	ruined	by	unsuitable	women.
But	tonight	he	would	finally	discover	how	it	felt	to	hold	and	possess	a	woman.	He	should	be	glad.
Babur	clapped	his	hands	for	the	four	attendants	his	father-in-law	had	pressed	on	him	as	a	courtesy.	This
was	his	wedding	day	and	he	must	observe	the	proprieties.	He	could	already	hear	them	murmuring	outside
the	tent,	and	at	his	signal	they	entered,	throwing	back	the	tent	flaps	and	letting	the	sunlight	stream	in.
Babur’s	wedding	clothes	–	trousers	of	soft	doeskin,	a	tunic	of	yellow	silk,	belted	with	the	heavy	gold
chain	his	father	had	worn	on	his	wedding	day,	and	a	long	coat	of	bronze	brocade	–	had	been	unpacked	the
night	 before	 and	 were	 draped	 over	 a	 dome-lidded	 chest.	 A	 high,	 dark	 blue	 velvet	 cap,	 sewn	 with	 tiny
pearls	by	Khanzada	and	with	a	crest	of	eagles’	feathers	was	on	a	nearby	stool.
Two	 hours	 later,	 after	 bathing	 in	 water	 heated	 over	 hot	 stones	 in	 the	 bath	 tent	 and	 allowing	 his
attendants	to	rub	his	body	down	with	bundles	of	fresh	herbs,	brush	and	perfume	his	long	hair	and	dress
him	in	his	finery,	Babur	was	ready.	As	he	stepped	into	the	sunshine,	the	eagle	feathers	in	his	cap	sent	long
shadows	dancing	over	the	ground	as	he	moved.

Suddenly	 shrill	 cries	 rose	 from	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 encampment.	 ‘From	 the	 women’s	 quarters,
Majesty,’	said	an	attendant,	seeing	Babur’s	puzzlement.	‘They	are	bidding	farewell	to	the	bride,	just	as	in
a	 few	 hours	 she	 must	 bid	 farewell	 to	 her	 virginity.’	 The	 women’s	 voices	 gathered	 intensity,	 becoming
almost	a	screech.	It	wasn’t	a	pleasant	sound	–	not	at	all	like	the	joyous	singing	heard	in	the	villages	of
Ferghana	when	a	marriage	was	taking	place.	It	was	more	like	a	lament.
Babur	 was	 glad	 to	 see	 a	 finely	 dressed	 Wazir	 Khan	 duck	 out	 of	 the	 low	 entrance	 to	 his	 tent	 pitched
beside	Babur’s.	‘Greetings,	Majesty,	on	your	wedding	day.’	Wazir	Khan’s	one-eyed	gaze	was	warm	and
Babur	felt	grateful	he	would	be	at	his	side.	‘Have	you	eaten,	Majesty?’
‘I’m	not	hungry.	I’ve	just	drunk	some	water.’
Babur	saw	understanding	in	Wazir	Khan’s	expression.
‘Our	guard	will	soon	be	here	to	escort	you	to	the	wedding	tent.’
‘Wazir	Khan	.	.	.’	Babur	wasn’t	sure	what	he	wanted	to	say	and	before	he	could	even	think,	the	sound	of
drums	 and	 trumpets	 filled	 the	 air,	 drowning	 the	 women’s	 eerie	 wailing,	 and	 he	 saw	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 men
approaching	in	a	double	line,	wearing	the	bright	yellow	of	Ferghana	and	preceded	by	his	own	musicians.
A	groom	was	leading	Babur’s	chestnut	horse,	splendidly	caparisoned	with	a	yellow	saddlecloth,	yellow
ribbons	woven	into	its	mane	and	tail	and	a	bridle	set	with	yellow	tiger’s	eyes.
Babur	climbed	into	the	saddle	and	allowed	his	men	to	lead	him	to	the	same	tented	chamber	in	the	centre
of	the	camp	where,	last	night,	he	had	feasted	and	where	Ibrahim	Saru	and	his	daughter	now	awaited	him.
As	Babur	dismounted,	the	black-clad	Mangligh	guards	outside	the	tent	saluted	him.	Slowly,	and	in	a	blare
of	trumpets,	he	made	his	way	to	where	Ibrahim	Saru,	dressed	in	dark	purple	velvet,	was	waiting	to	greet
him.
To	 one	 side,	 separated	 off	 by	 a	 three-foot-high	 latticed	 wooden	 screen,	 were	 the	 ladies	 of	 Ibrahim
Saru’s	 court.	 The	 lower	 halves	 of	 their	 faces	 were	 veiled	 but	 above	 the	 filmy	 gauze,	 their	 dark	 eyes,
elongated	and	thickly	lashed,	were	examining	him	with	frank	curiosity.	In	their	centre,	in	places	of	honour,
he	saw	his	grandmother,	mother	and	sister.	Esan	Dawlat	was	sitting	very	erect,	a	blue	shawl	embroidered
with	gold	stars	clasped	tight	round	her	head	and	shoulders.	Kutlugh	Nigar,	in	a	loose	yellow	silk	tunic	and
with	several	long	strands	of	pearls	hanging	round	her	neck,	was	looking	proudly	at	him	while	Khanzada’s
eyes	–	far	rounder	than	those	of	the	Mangligh	women	–	were	shining.
In	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 vast	 tent,	 seated	 on	 a	 golden	 cushion	 on	 a	 maroon-carpeted	 dais	 his	 bride	 was
waiting.	A	brazier	of	charcoals	scented	with	incense	was	burning	in	front	of	her	so	she	was	concealed	not
only	 by	 the	 heavy	 cream	 veils,	 falling	 from	 beneath	 a	 cap	 of	 golden	 cloth,	 but	 by	 wisps	 of	 smoke
spiralling	into	the	air,	drawn	upwards	by	the	open	flap	in	the	roof.	As	Babur	walked	up	to	her,	Ayisha
remained	motionless,	betraying	no	awareness	that	Babur,	so	soon	to	be	her	husband,	was	standing	before
her.	He	wished	he	could	see	her	expression.
The	trumpets	faded,	and	for	a	moment	there	was	complete	silence.
‘Ayisha!’	 At	 her	 father’s	 voice,	 the	 girl	 rose.	 She	 was	 tall	 but	 whether	 fat	 or	 thin,	 gracefully
proportioned	 or	 clumsily	 built,	 Babur	 couldn’t	 tell,	 though	 he	 caught	 a	 brief	 glimpse	 of	 long	 feet
elaborately	hennaed	in	diamond	patterns.
‘Come.’	Ibrahim	Saru	motioned	to	Babur	to	step	on	to	the	dais	and	face	his	bride.	Next,	he	gestured	to
his	 daughter	 to	 give	 him	 her	 right	 hand	 from	 beneath	 her	 veils.	 Taking	 it,	 he	 placed	 it	 in	 Babur’s	 right
hand.	Ayisha’s	hand	was	cool	and	dry.
A	tall,	black-clad,	white-bearded	mullah	stepped	forward	and	in	a	deep,	resonant	voice	half	sang,	half
spoke	 what	 Babur	 assumed	 must	 be	 prayers	 or	 benedictions.	 Though	 he	 listened	 carefully,	 he	 couldn’t
recognise	the	tongue	in	which	the	man	was	speaking.	It	must	be	Persian.	As	the	priest	finally	came	to	an
end	 and	 stepped	 back,	 prayer	 book	 clasped	 to	 his	 chest,	 Ibrahim	 Saru	 flung	 a	 fistful	 of	 grain	 over	 the

young	 couple.	 A	 chorus	 of	 roaring	 male	 voices	 rose,	 filling	 the	 tent,	 and	 fistful	 after	 stinging	 fistful	 of
grain	was	suddenly	flying	through	the	air.	The	Mangligh	women	began	to	ululate,	high	and	piercing,	like	a
flock	of	birds	in	flight.
Ayisha	turned	to	Babur.	He	smiled	and	hoped	for	some	sign	from	her,	but	after	a	moment	she	pulled	her
hand	 from	 his	 and	 stepped	 down	 from	 the	 dais.	 At	 once	 the	 Mangligh	 women	 rose	 from	 behind	 their
screen	and	surging	forward	swooped	on	Ayisha.	To	Babur’s	astonishment,	shrieking	with	merriment,	they
began	pulling	her	cream	veils	from	her,	spinning	her	round	and	round	and	ripping	at	the	fragile	cloth.
What	 were	 his	 family	 and	 his	 chiefs	 making	 of	 all	 this?	 Babur	 saw	 Wazir	 Khan	 standing	 near	 the
entrance	to	the	tent,	his	expression	as	nonplussed	as	Babur	knew	his	own	must	be.	Still	seated	decorously
behind	 the	 screen,	 Khanzada	 had	 allowed	 her	 jaw	 to	 drop	 in	 frank	 amazement	 while	 Esan	 Dawlat	 and
Kutlugh	Nigar	were	gazing	fixedly	ahead,	as	if	too	well	bred	to	notice	such	bizarre	happenings.
Ayisha	 was	 still	 half	 cocooned	 as	 musicians,	 with	 long	 brass	 pipes,	 cymbals,	 bells	 and	 taut-skinned
drums,	suddenly	struck	up.	The	women	stepped	back	from	her	and	began	to	sing,	clap	and	stamp,	beating
out	 the	 rhythm	 with	 their	 hands	 and	 feet.	 Babur	 realised	 that	 the	 men	 had	 drawn	 right	 back	 against	 the
walls	of	the	tent	and	that	the	women	had	formed	a	human	barrier	around	the	bride	so	that	she	was	visible
only	to	him	and	to	her	father.	Now	Ayisha	started	to	dance,	sinuously	twisting	and	turning	until	the	last	of
her	draperies,	except	the	veil	concealing	the	lower	half	of	her	face,	fell	away.
Babur	saw	a	pair	of	coal-dark	eyes	flicker	over	him.	Her	hair,	instead	of	hanging	free,	was	plaited	and
coiled	round	her	small	head.	Her	long	body,	in	dark	purple	trousers	gathered	at	the	ankles,	a	tight-fitting
bodice	 that	 left	 her	 midriff	 bare	 and	 a	 long,	 filmy	 coat	 that	 fastened	 at	 her	 breast,	 looked	 slim	 and
muscular.	A	dark	gem	–	an	amethyst	perhaps	–	sparkled	in	her	navel.
‘Take	 her.	 She	 is	 yours.’	 Ibrahim	 Saru	 shoved	 Babur	 towards	 her.	 ‘The	 wedding	 couch	 waits	 –	 go.
Enjoy	her,	then	the	feast	.	.	.’
Seeing	his	startled	expression,	his	father-in-law	laughed.	‘Don’t	the	princes	of	Ferghana	have	fire	in
their	loins?’
Babur	flushed	and	took	Ayisha’s	hand.	Ibrahim	Saru	flung	a	cloak	around	his	daughter,	clapped	twice
and	the	musicians	rose.	Still	playing	their	wild	music,	they	formed	up	into	two	rows.
‘They	 will	 play	 you	 to	 your	 marriage	 bed.	 My	 nobles	 and	 I	 will	 follow	 you.’	 Ibrahim	 Saru	 was
beaming	broadly.
Babur’s	head	throbbed	as	the	caterwauling	musicians	led	the	wedding	procession	out	of	Ibrahim	Saru’s
magnificent	 tent	 into	 the	 sunlight.	 The	 wedding	 tent,	 pitched	 close	 to	 the	 women’s	 quarters,	 was	 gaudy
with	 flags	 and	 pennants	 in	 the	 yellow	 of	 Ferghana	 and	 the	 black	 and	 red	 of	 Zaamin.	 Not	 a	 pleasant
combination,	Babur	thought.
The	musicians	fanned	out,	taking	up	positions	at	either	side	of	the	entrance.	Attendants	in	red	and	black
knelt	 and	 touched	 their	 foreheads	 to	 the	 ground	 as	 Babur	 led	 Ayisha	 inside.	 The	 large	 tent	 was
sumptuously	carpeted	but	barer	than	Babur	had	expected.	At	its	centre	was	a	thick	mattress	covered	with
a	pale,	flowered	silk	sheet	that	glimmered	in	the	light	shed	by	two	huge	candelabra	on	either	side.	Over
the	mattress	was	a	rectangular	wooden	frame	hung	with	curtains	lined	with	squirrel	fur	which	could	be
pulled	all	the	way	round	to	screen	the	bed.	And	that	was	all.	No	chests,	mirrors	or	stools.
Babur	 barely	 had	 time	 to	 take	 it	 in	 before	 giggling	 women	 were	 leading	 Ayisha	 to	 the	 mattress	 and
drawing	the	curtains	around	her	so	that	she	was	hidden	from	view.	A	moment	later	and	male	attendants
were	pulling	at	his	clothes.	Babur	fought	the	impulse	to	lash	out	at	the	eager,	questing	fingers	lifting	his
cap	from	his	head,	untying	his	coat	and	tunic,	unfastening	his	trousers	and	drawing	off	first	one	boot,	then
the	other.	In	a	few	moments	he	was	naked.	The	attendants	draped	a	silk	robe	round	him,	then	began	to	call
out.	 Babur	 couldn’t	 understand	 what	 they	 were	 saying	 but	 guessed	 they	 must	 be	 speaking	 to	 the	 women

who	 hastily	 came	 out	 from	 behind	 the	 curtains	 and,	 eyes	 averted,	 hurried	 from	 the	 tent.	 The	 male
attendants	followed,	closing	the	tent	flaps	tightly	behind	them.
He	 and	 Ayisha	 were	 alone.	 For	 a	 moment	 he	 hesitated.	 Then,	 letting	 the	 robe	 drop	 to	 the	 floor,	 he
approached	the	mattress	and	pulled	apart	the	curtains.	Ayisha	was	lying	naked,	her	hair	still	tightly	bound
but	 the	 soft	 curves	 of	 her	 body	 fully	 open	 to	 his	 view.	 Her	 slender	 arms	 and	 long,	 slim	 legs	 were
decorated	with	the	same	elaborately	hennaed	patterns	Babur	had	glimpsed	on	her	feet.	Her	nipples	had
been	 painted	 crimson	 and	 ringed	 with	 circles	 of	 henna.	 She	 was	 eyeing	 his	 own	 nakedness	 with	 what
seemed	to	Babur	unnerving	coolness.	What	was	she	thinking?	His	scars	at	least	showed	he	was	no	mere
boy	but	a	warrior	who	had	shed	blood.
Babur	lowered	himself	beside	her	and	lay	so	that	their	bodies	were	close	but	not	quite	touching.	After	a
moment	–	saying	nothing	because	he	was	unsure	what	to	say	–	he	placed	a	gentle,	exploratory	hand	on	the
warm	flesh	of	her	waist	and,	when	she	did	not	react,	moved	it	down	to	caress	the	soft	curve	of	her	hip.
Still	getting	no	response,	he	tentatively	slipped	it	towards	the	dark	triangle	between	her	thighs.
Suddenly	Babur	felt	that	his	young	blood	could	be	contained	no	longer.	The	tension	of	the	day	seemed
to	explode	inside	him,	translating	into	a	fierce	physical	desire	that	must	be	satisfied.	He	pulled	himself	on
top	of	her	and,	with	eager	hands,	grabbed	clumsily	at	the	soft	flesh	of	her	breasts.	He	tried	to	enter	her	but
found	he	couldn’t.	Beneath	him	her	body	was	rigid	and	unyielding.	Raising	his	head,	he	looked	into	her
eyes,	wanting	her	help,	but	found	no	warmth	there,	no	willingness	to	respond	to	his	silent	plea	or	play	any
more	than	a	passive	role	–	only,	or	so	it	seemed	to	him,	contempt	for	his	inexperienced	fumblings.
Goaded,	 he	 tried	 again	 and,	 pushing	 hard,	 finally	 succeeded	 in	 penetrating	 her.	 He	 could	 feel	 her
tightness	as	he	began	to	thrust	and	then,	as	she	gave	a	single	sharp	cry,	that	entry	was	becoming	easier.
Panting,	 he	 pushed	 deeper	 and	 deeper,	 oblivious	 to	 everything	 until,	 at	 last,	 he	 collapsed,	 spent	 and
sweating,	on	her	supine	body.
With	his	blood	still	roaring	through	his	veins,	it	took	Babur	a	moment	to	recover	himself,	to	remember
where	he	was	and	what	had	just	happened.	When	he	did,	he	pulled	himself	away	from	Ayisha,	unwilling
to	 meet	 her	 eyes.	 When,	 finally,	 he	 did	 look	 at	 her,	 she	 had	 not	 moved	 and	 her	 expression	 remained
distant,	 inscrutable	 and	 unsmiling.	 He	 might	 have	 got	 himself	 a	 wife,	 but	 this	 was	 not	 how	 he	 had
imagined	it	would	be.	Babur	sat	up	and	turned	his	back	on	her,	barely	noticing	the	small	pool	of	blood	that
had	 seeped	 from	 beneath	 her	 to	 stain	 the	 sheet,	 which	 would	 in	 due	 course	 be	 exhibited	 to	 the	 general
view	to	prove	she	had	been	a	virgin	on	her	wedding	day	and	was	now	no	longer.

	
	
	

Chapter	9
Baburi
	

The	hunting	around	Shahrukiyyah	was	good.	Deer	and	fat	squealing	boar	abounded	in	the	dense	forests
while	 the	 coppices	 and	 pasture	 provided	 pheasants,	 hares	 and	 foxes	 enough	 for	 excellent	 sport.	 Babur
narrowed	his	eyes	as	he	pulled	back	his	bow-string,	then	smiled	as	he	watched	his	arrow	cut	through	the
air	and	hit	its	mark	–	the	white	throat	of	a	young	buck	that	staggered,	then	fell.	Since	his	return	from	his
marriage	in	Zaamin	two	months	ago,	he’d	been	spending	a	lot	of	time	out	hunting.
Now,	with	dusk	falling,	Babur	turned	his	horse	for	home,	his	hawk	again	quiescent	beneath	its	gilded
leather	 hood,	 the	 deer	 slung	 from	 poles	 and	 rabbits	 and	 pheasants	 dangling	 limply	 from	 his	 huntsmen’s
saddles.	He	felt	a	dark	mood	envelop	him.	Never	before	had	he	quarrelled	with	his	grandmother,	but	Esan
Dawlat’s	 interference	 was	 growing	 intolerable.	 She	 was	 actually	 keeping	 count	 of	 his	 couplings	 with
Ayisha	and	complaining	constantly.	‘At	first	you	went	to	her	twice	a	week.	Now	it	is	only	every	seven
days	–	sometimes	longer	.	.	.	You	are	insulting	her.	Remember	your	duty	to	Ferghana,’	she	had	snapped
this	morning,	oblivious	both	to	his	embarrassment	and	his	anger.	‘You	know	no	fear	as	a	warrior,	so	why
hide	from	a	woman	.	.	.	?’
Stung,	he	had	yelled	back,	‘You	are	not	my	commander,	nor	I	your	stud	stallion	required	to	service	to
order	your	choice	of	mare.’
He	had	not	objected	to	the	marriage,	and	understood	the	reasons	for	it,	but	he	had	not	sought	it	either,
and	the	cold	disdain	of	his	bride	–	apparent	even	on	their	wedding	night	–	had	persisted	and	hardened.
She	 rarely	 spoke	 to	 him	 and,	 when	 she	 did,	 it	 was	 only	 to	 reply	 monosyllabically	 to	 his	 questions	 or
requests.	He	had	never	seen	her	smile	–	not	once.	A	smile	might	have	softened	her	and,	in	turn,	softened
his	 feelings	 towards	 her.	 Instead,	 lying	 with	 her	 seemed	 almost	 like	 sleeping	 with	 a	 warm	 corpse	 –	 no
response,	 no	 passion,	 no	 engagement,	 just	 those	 unblinking	 dark	 eyes	 seemingly	 focused	 on	 the	 middle
distance	as	he	spent	himself	in	her	unresisting	body.
What	 was	 in	 Ayisha’s	 mind?	 Why	 wouldn’t	 she	 respond	 to	 him	 either	 physically	 or	 mentally	 he
wondered,	yet	again,	as	he	rode	along	a	track	green	with	the	tender	shoots	of	spring.	Was	the	fault	his	or
hers?	Surely	it	was	hers.	What	was	wrong	with	her?	At	her	request,	she	and	her	Mangligh	attendants	had
their	 own	 chambers	 away	 from	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 women’s.	 Whenever	 he	 approached	 he	 could	 hear	 them
speaking	their	strange	language	and	sometimes	laughing,	but	as	he	entered	they	would	at	once	fall	quiet.
Ayisha	 would	 salute	 him	 with	 a	 formal	 bow	 of	 her	 head,	 then	 wait	 in	 silence,	 expressionless	 eyes
downcast,	for	his	bidding,	like	a	slave	rather	than	a	wife.	Except	that	a	slave	was	humble	and	Ayisha	was
not.
It	 seemed	 to	 Babur	 that	 she	 wore	 her	 pride	 like	 a	 weapon	 against	 him.	 Her	 detachment	 goaded	 him.
Sometimes	 when	 he	 made	 love	 to	 her,	 he	 became	 rough	 in	 spite	 of	 himself,	 trying	 with	 his	 sheer
physicality	to	force	a	reaction	from	her	–	anything.	But	there	was	nothing,	and	although	she	did	not	resist,
he	was	left	feeling	like	a	ravisher,	a	forcer	of	women,	instead	of	her	lawful	husband.	At	other	times	he
had	tried	to	be	gentle,	caressing	the	soft	lines	of	her	body,	cupping	her	breasts,	kissing	her	nipples	and	her
small	rounded	belly	–	just	as	he	had	treated	the	pliant	women	of	his	adolescent	dreams	–	but	unlike	them

Ayisha	had	not	responded,	remaining	rigidly	indifferent.
When,	 blushing	 and	 stammering,	 he	 had	 asked	 Khanzada	 –	 who	 had	 been	 so	 eager	 for	 the
companionship	a	royal	sister-in-law	would	provide	and	so	generous	with	her	carefully	chosen	presents	–
whether	Ayisha	had	ever	confided	anything	about	him	or	his	behaviour,	she	shook	her	head.	She	told	him
that	immediately	after	the	marriage	she	had	often	visited	Ayisha	but	had	found	only	the	most	formal	and
aloof	welcome,	no	willingness	to	empathise	or	to	unbend	and	share	confidences	–	so	she	had	ceased	her
unreciprocated	visits.	It	was,	Khanzada	said,	as	if	Ayisha	wished	she	were	somewhere	else,	and	in	her
mind	pretended	she	was.
Babur	 was	 still	 caught	 up	 in	 his	 thoughts	 as	 he	 and	 his	 men	 galloped	 into	 the	 jumble	 of	 mud-brick
houses,	wooden	shacks	and	round	hide	tents	that	clustered	beneath	the	walls	of	Shahrukiyyah.	The	poorly
clothed	 inhabitants	 were	 squatting	 over	 smoking	 fires	 to	 cook	 their	 evening	 meals	 while	 their	 children
played	 barefoot	 in	 the	 sloping	 alleyways,	 jumping	 over	 the	 little	 rivulets	 that	 carried	 sewage	 and	 other
refuse	down	the	hill.	As	they	approached	the	stone	gatehouse	with	its	iron-bound	doors,	a	small	child	–	no
more	than	two	or	three	years	old	–	suddenly	ran	out	in	front	of	Babur.	His	horse	reared,	neighing	in	alarm.
Pulling	hard	on	the	reins,	Babur	turned	the	chestnut	so	that	its	flailing	hoofs	missed	the	child,	who	was
now	standing	wide-eyed,	wailing	and	immobile	with	fear.	A	rider	behind	Babur	was	not	so	quick	to	react
and	it	seemed	he	would	ride	the	child	down.	But	there	was	a	shout	and	a	youth	dived	forward,	seizing	the
child,	 pulling	 it	 to	 the	 ground	 and	 shielding	 it	 with	 his	 body.	 The	 rider,	 cursing	 volubly	 as	 he	 fought	 to
control	his	black	horse,	managed	to	jump	over	them	but	one	of	his	horse’s	rear	hoofs	caught	the	youth	hard
on	the	back	of	the	head.
Babur	dismounted	and	knelt	by	the	unconscious	young	man	whose	arms	were	still	round	the	child	–	a
little	girl,	Babur	could	now	see.	She	was	whimpering,	a	thin	trail	of	snot	running	down	her	upper	lip.	As
one	of	his	men	lifted	her	out	of	the	way,	Babur	turned	the	youth	on	to	his	back.	He	was	about	the	same	age
as	himself,	Babur	thought,	with	an	aquiline	nose,	high	cheekbones	and	a	stubbly	chin.	He	probed	his	head,
with	the	expertise	gleaned	from	many	battles,	and	found	beneath	the	dark	hair	a	place	that	was	spongy	and
sticky	with	blood.	The	youth,	whose	breathing	was	shallow,	seemed	deeply	unconscious.	He	had	taken	a
hard	blow,	risking	his	life	for	the	little	girl.	It	would	be	a	shame	if	he	didn’t	live	to	know	he’d	saved	her.
‘Bring	him	up	to	the	castle.	Let’s	see	what	our	hakims	can	do	for	him.’	Babur	remounted	and,	feeling
even	more	sombre	than	before,	continued	towards	the	castle	gates.

That	 night,	 Babur	 knew	 he	 should	 go	 to	 Ayisha.	 It	 would	 please	 his	 grandmother	 and	 his	 mother	 and
perhaps,	 once	 she	 was	 pregnant,	 Ayisha	 herself	 might	 find	 some	 contentment.	 More	 importantly,	 the
prospect	of	a	grandchild	might	prompt	Ibrahim	Saru	to	honour	his	promise	of	crossbowmen	to	help	Babur
retake	his	birthplace,	Akhsi.	It	was	full	spring	now	and	high	time	for	Babur	to	be	moving	against	his	halfbrother	 Jahangir.	 Instead,	 each	 time	 he	 sent	 a	 messenger	 to	 Zaamin	 asking	 for	 news	 of	 when	 the
crossbowmen	would	arrive,	the	reply	was	the	same:	soon	they	would	come,	soon	.	.	.
After	he	had	bathed,	Babur	set	out	dutifully	for	his	wife’s	quarters,	but	when	he	saw	the	green,	leatherlined	 double	 doors	 ahead,	 he	 stopped.	 No.	 As	 he	 had	 shouted	 at	 Esan	 Dawlat,	 he	 wasn’t	 a	 stud	 beast
required	to	perform	to	order.	He	was	a	man	who	knew	his	own	mind	and	would	do	as	he	pleased.	Turning
on	his	heel,	he	walked	quickly	away.

At	least	Babur’s	pessimism	about	the	youth	proved	misplaced.	Six	hours	later,	a	servant	brought	word	that
he	 had	 recovered	 consciousness.	 That	 should	 have	 been	 the	 end	 of	 it.	 But	 for	 some	 reason	 Babur	 was
curious	to	know	more	and,	on	the	second	day	after	the	accident,	ordered	the	youth,	if	he	was	well	enough,
to	be	carried	to	him	on	a	litter.
The	young	man	was	very	pale	but	saluted	Babur	from	his	prone	position,	touching	his	hand	to	his	chest
and	inclining	his	head	–	a	gesture	that	clearly	hurt	because	he	winced.
‘You	were	brave	to	save	the	child	like	that.	I’m	glad	God	has	been	compassionate	to	you,	preserving
your	own	life.	What	is	your	name?’
‘Baburi,	Majesty.’
Babur	looked	down	at	him	in	frank	surprise.	Baburi	was	an	unusual	name,	but	also	so	similar	to	his
own.	‘Where	are	you	from?	What	is	your	tribe?’
‘My	father	was	a	warrior	of	the	Barin	people	and	served	your	father,	but	he	died	when	I	was	a	baby.	I
have	no	memory	of	him.	My	mother	took	me	to	Samarkand	but	she	died	of	smallpox	when	I	was	seven.
I’ve	fended	for	myself	ever	since.’
‘What	are	you?	A	soldier?’
‘No,	Majesty.’	Baburi	raised	his	eyes	to	Babur’s.	They	were	a	dark	blue,	almost	indigo.	‘Till	recently	I
was	a	market	boy.	I	hawked	cabbages	on	the	streets	of	Samarkand.’
‘How	did	you	come	to	be	in	Shahrukiyyah?’
‘When	you	captured	Samarkand,	Majesty,	I	got	a	job	as	a	water-carrier	with	one	of	your	chiefs.	He	has
since	gone	home	to	Ferghana	but	I	decided	to	stay.’	Baburi	spoke	directly,	with	a	simple	dignity.
‘But	I	have	not	seen	you	before?’
‘That	isn’t	surprising.	I	work	in	the	kitchens	now,	skinning	animals	and	pulling	the	guts	out	of	chickens.
It	isn’t	glorious	but	it’s	a	job.’	A	half-smile	curled	his	lips.	‘It	could	be	worse.’
He’s	laughing	at	me,	Babur	thought,	astonished.	I	amuse	him.	‘I’m	sure	it	could	be	worse	–	sometimes
we	must	accept	what	fate	doles	out,	even	disembowelling	chickens.	But	now	perhaps	fate	has	something
different	in	store.	Your	bravery	suggests	you	could	be	a	soldier.’
‘I’d	like	that	.	.	.	After	all,	I’ve	proved	I’ve	got	a	good	thick	skull	to	take	a	blow	.	.	.	And	it	would	be
preferable	to	the	kitchens	–	even	if	occasionally	I	have	to	spill	human	guts	or	even	lose	some	of	my	own.’
Still	the	youth	smiled.
‘Very	well.	As	soon	as	you	are	recovered,	you	shall	join	my	cavalry.’
Babur	had	expected	rapturous	gratitude	but	the	youth’s	smile	disappeared.	His	expression	changed	to
one	of	discomfort	and	his	pale	face	flushed.	‘What	is	the	matter?’
‘I	can	scarcely	ride,	Majesty.’
Babur	bit	his	lip	at	his	own	stupidity.	In	a	society	of	nomads	where	only	the	poorest	were	ignorant	of
horses,	it	was	a	shaming	thing	to	have	to	confess.	How	could	a	poor	market	boy	have	learned	to	be	a	good
enough	horseman	to	join	the	cavalry?
Anxious	to	spare	Baburi	further	embarrassment,	he	said	quickly,	‘You	have	already	shown	you	have	no
fear	of	horses.	Tell	the	master-of-horse	to	arrange	your	training	as	a	cavalryman	as	soon	as	you’re	fit.’

‘So,	we	are	agreed.	If	no	Mangligh	crossbowmen	have	come	from	Zaamin	by	the	time	of	the	new	moon
after	next,	we	will	march	on	Akhsi	anyway.’	Babur	gazed	at	his	counsellors,	seated	cross-legged	in	a	halfcircle	round	him.

There	was	still	no	news	of	the	Mangligh	reinforcements	and	Babur	had	had	enough.	The	lands	he	had
seized	were	still	securely	in	his	hands,	the	forts	he	had	taken	well	garrisoned	under	chieftains	he	could
trust,	but	he	could	not	afford	to	wait	much	longer.	He	must	regain	Akhsi	and	quickly.	Then	he	could	truly
call	himself	Ferghana’s	king	and	plan	for	a	greater	future.
‘In	 the	 meantime,	 Majesty,	 we	 must	 continue	 to	 drill	 our	 troops.	 We	 have	 enough	 siege	 engines	 and
enough	 catapults	 but	 many	 of	 the	 men	 are	 still	 undisciplined.	 Under	 fire	 they	 may	 forget	 what	 we	 have
tried	to	hammer	into	their	heads.	And	we	must	also	build	up	our	supplies.	Though	we	do	not	want	a	long
siege,	it	may	come	to	it,’	said	Wazir	Khan.
‘You’re	right.	And	when	we	march	out,	we	must	send	raiding	parties	ahead	to	seize	flocks	before	they
are	taken	to	feed	the	garrison	of	Akhsi.	Baisanghar,	I	look	to	you	to	have	men	ready	for	such	a	task	–	men
we	can	trust.	There	is	to	be	no	killing	or	looting	of	my	people.	We	will	pay	for	what	we	take.	I	am	a	king
returning	to	his	own,	not	an	Uzbek	bandit	out	on	a	raid.’
Babur	rose,	pleased	that	he	had	taken	control	and	that	the	waiting	would	soon	be	over.	Feeling	restless,
he	 hurried	 out	 into	 the	 courtyard	 and	 ordered	 his	 favourite	 horse	 to	 be	 saddled.	 Taken	 by	 surprise,	 the
grooms	rushed	to	obey	while	his	bodyguards,	shouting	for	their	own	mounts,	added	to	the	confusion.	They
were	getting	sloppy	and	lax.	He	noticed	the	broad-shouldered,	slim-waisted	figure	of	Baburi,	broom	in
his	hands,	coming	from	the	stables	and	summoned	him	with	a	wave.
‘Majesty?’	Today	Baburi	seemed	unwilling	to	look	Babur	in	the	eye.
‘How	is	your	riding?’
Silence.
‘I	gave	orders	that	you	were	to	train	for	the	cavalry.’
Still	silence.
‘And	I	am	not	used	to	being	disobeyed.’	Babur	was	perplexed.	The	youth	had	seemed	so	eager	yet	he
had	done	nothing.	He	had	wanted	to	help	Baburi	and	had	thought	he	detected	a	spark	in	him,	but	he	must
have	been	wrong.	Baburi	was	as	dull	as	the	cabbages	he	had	once	peddled.	Disappointed,	Babur	turned
away.	As	he	did	so	he	noticed	a	bruise	on	the	side	of	Baburi’s	high-cheekboned	face.	‘Wait.	What	is	that
mark?’
‘Your	master-of-horse	hit	me.’
‘Why?’
Now,	at	last,	Baburi	looked	at	him.	‘Because	I	said	that	I	wanted	to	ride,	to	be	a	cavalryman.	He	said	I
was	fit	only	for	shovelling	horse	shit.’
‘Did	you	mention	that	it	was	my	personal	wish?’
‘Perhaps	not	in	so	many	words.	I	thought	he	would	have	heard.	And	he	gave	me	no	chance	to	explain
before	he	hit	me.	Afterwards,	it	was	all	I	could	do	to	restrain	myself	from	thumping	him.	It	didn’t	seem	the
time	for	explanations	.	.	.	or	for	pleading.	If	you	were	serious,	I	knew	it	would	get	sorted	out	sometime.	If
not,	the	stables	were	better	than	the	kitchen.’
Babur	turned	to	one	of	his	guards.	‘Fetch	Ali	Gosht.’
A	few	moments	later,	the	man	was	kneeling	before	him.	He	was	of	the	Saghrichi	tribe,	descended,	like
Babur	 himself,	 from	 Genghis	 Khan,	 and	 famous	 for	 his	 skill	 with	 horses.	 It	 was	 said	 he	 could	 break	 a
stallion	 in	 two	 days.	 Ali	 Gosht	 was	 loyal	 and	 conscientious,	 if	 quick-tempered	 and	 conscious	 of	 the
dignity	 of	 his	 hard-won	 position.	 Babur	 suspected	 Baburi	 had	 not	 chosen	 the	 time	 or	 manner	 of	 his
approach	with	particular	care.	No	doubt	Ali	Gosht	had	assumed	that	Baburi	was	being	presumptuous	–	a
trait	for	which	the	Barin	clan	had	no	mean	reputation.	It	was	his	own	fault,	Babur	thought,	for	not	making
his	orders	clear.
‘I	intend	this	man	to	be	a	member	of	my	cavalry.	We	will	start	his	training	now.	Fetch	a	horse	from	the

royal	stables.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
Twenty	 minutes	 later	 Babur,	 with	 Baburi	 clinging	 to	 his	 mount	 –	 a	 quiet	 mare	 –	 rode	 out	 of
Shahrukiyyah,	the	usual	escort	of	guards	close	behind.	It	was	a	warm	afternoon	and	bees	hummed	in	the
patches	of	thick	white	clover	that	covered	the	meadows	and	sweetened	the	air.	Babur	reined	in	and	turned
in	 his	 saddle	 to	 watch	 Baburi’s	 progress.	 He	 was	 sitting	 a	 little	 straighter	 now,	 no	 longer	 clutching	 the
horse’s	mane.	‘Grip	with	your	knees.	Keep	your	ankles	in,	your	heels	down	and	your	feet	in	the	stirrups.’
Baburi	nodded,	with	a	frown	of	concentration.	He	had	natural	grace	in	the	saddle	and	would	make	a
good	rider,	Babur	thought.	What	had	his	life	been	like	till	now?	It	was	hard	for	Babur	to	imagine.	Images
came	into	his	head	of	the	scrawny	old	man	with	his	mildewed	onions	in	the	square	in	Samarkand	where
Babur	had	hidden	after	creeping	into	the	city	through	the	tunnel.	Perhaps	Baburi	had	been	somewhere	in
the	square	that	morning.
‘Come	on,’	Babur	shouted.	‘Hurry	up.’
‘I	will	–	if	I	can	persuade	the	horse	to	agree,	Majesty.’

A	 few	 days	 later,	 Babur	 was	 handing	 his	 horse	 to	 his	 groom	 outside	 the	 stables,	 when	 he	 saw	 Baburi
inside,	 bending	 down	 with	 his	 back	 towards	 him	 to	 groom	 his	 horse’s	 legs.	 Babur	 walked	 over	 to	 him
quietly	and	extended	his	hand	to	tap	his	shoulder	to	ask	him	how	he	was	progressing.	As	he	did	so,	his
wrist	was	gripped	and	twisted.	Baburi	had	whipped	around	and	grabbed	him.	As	soon	as	he	saw	who	it
was,	he	let	go	and	dropped	to	his	knees.	‘Forgive	me,	Majesty,	I	didn’t	realise	it	was	you.’
‘Of	course	you	did	not,	but	even	so	why	did	you	react	like	that?’
‘Instinct.	When	you	live	on	the	streets	as	a	child	and	you	sense	someone	sneaking	up	behind	you,	you
must	act	quickly	to	protect	what	you’ve	got	–	whether	food	or	a	coin	or	indeed	your	freedom.	There	were
plenty	of	men	ready	to	abduct	children	to	sell	them	into	slavery	or	worse.’
‘Was	there	no	one	to	look	out	for	you?’
‘Not	after	my	mother	died.	Sometimes	people	were	kind	but	usually	because	they	wanted	something	–
even	if	it	was	only	gratitude	or	flattery	or	to	have	you	do	their	bidding.	Those	you	were	most	likely	to	be
able	to	rely	on	–	for	information	on	the	back	way	into	a	bakery	to	steal	a	loaf	or	a	good	place	to	sleep	in
winter	–	were	your	fellow	street	children	and	even	they	looked	after	themselves	first.’
‘Was	it	really	like	that?	Are	people	so	selfish?’
‘Perhaps	I	exaggerate.	I	made	some	good	friends,’	Baburi	said,	then	added,	with	a	wry	smile,	‘Is	it	so
different	at	court?	How	many	can	you	rely	on	unquestioningly	among	your	counsellors?	Who	doesn’t	put
his	 own	 interest	 before	 yours,	 seeking	 some	 advantage	 for	 himself,	 some	 honour	 or	 reward	 to	 raise
himself	above	his	peers?	How	many	of	your	fellow	rulers	–	relatives	or	not	–	wouldn’t	sneak	into	your
territory	 to	 plunder	 it	 when	 your	 attention	 is	 distracted,	 like	 I	 did	 into	 bakeries	 when	 the	 owner	 was
serving	someone	else?’
Babur	 suddenly	 scowled,	 reminded	 so	 forcibly	 of	 the	 actions	 of	 his	 half-brother	 Jahangir	 and	 his
cousins	Tambal	and	Mahmud.	‘I	still	prefer	life	in	the	castle	to	that	on	the	streets	–	and	so	do	you,	or	you
wouldn’t	be	here.’
‘At	 least	 I	 have	 a	 choice.	 You	 are	 a	 chieftain	 or	 nothing.	 You	 can	 never	 live	 an	 obscure,	 quiet	 life.
Someone	 will	 see	 you	 as	 a	 threat	 and	 kill	 you.	 I’m	 free	 to	 choose	 my	 fate,	 so	 my	 options	 are	 more
numerous	if	less	exalted.	Yes,	I	do	prefer	it	here,	but	I	shan’t	get	too	comfortable.’

‘Quite	right.	My	father	used	to	say	it	was	possible	to	be	too	clever	for	one’s	own	good	and	that,	I	think,
applies	to	paupers	as	well	as	princes.’	With	that	Babur	turned	away,	satisfied	to	have	had	the	last	word.

As	he	had	done	a	dozen	times	before	over	recent	weeks,	Babur	tied	the	length	of	coarse	blue	cloth	round
his	waist.	His	black	trousers	were	ragged	at	the	hem	and	the	leather	jerkin	he	pulled	on	over	the	dun	tunic
was	shiny	and	worn.
‘Take	care,	Majesty.’	Wazir	Khan	looked	worried.
Babur	guessed	he	disapproved	of	these	night-time	excursions	and,	even	more,	of	his	growing	closeness
with	Baburi,	his	companion	in	them.	But	for	Babur	his	adventures	were	becoming	addictive	insight	into
the	lives	of	his	people.	‘I	will.’	He	smiled	at	his	old	friend	as	he	slipped	from	the	chamber	and	hurried
down	 a	 narrow	 back	 staircase	 to	 a	 small	 courtyard	 at	 the	 back	 of	 the	 fort	 where,	 as	 they	 had	 agreed,
Baburi	was	waiting	for	him	in	the	darkness.
Silently,	they	made	for	a	side	gate	where	Wazir	Khan’s	guards,	knowing	who	they	were,	let	them	pass
without	 challenge.	 Several	 hundred	 yards	 beyond	 the	 castle,	 grazing	 contentedly,	 were	 the	 two	 ponies
Babur	had	ordered	to	be	saddled	and	tethered	there.
They	untied	them,	jumped	on	to	their	backs	and,	with	a	click	of	their	tongues	and	a	drumming	of	their
feet	on	the	ponies’	well-fed	sides,	cantered	into	the	darkness.	It	was	extraordinary,	Babur	thought,	how	in
just	 a	 few	 short	 weeks	 Baburi	 was	 becoming	 like	 the	 full	 blood-brother	 he	 had	 never	 had.	 He	 was
teaching	him	to	fight	with	a	sword,	to	wrestle,	even	to	fire	arrows	from	the	saddle	–	as	Wazir	Khan	had
once	taught	him.	Baburi	had	indeed	proved	a	natural	horseman	and,	made	wiser	by	a	few	bruising	falls,
could	now	almost	keep	pace	with	Babur.
Baburi,	in	turn,	was	teaching	him	the	songs	and	dances	of	the	people	–	and	even	the	concealment	skills
and	deftness	required	of	the	sneak	thief.	It	had	been	Baburi,	too,	who	had	taught	him	how	to	dress	as	a
peasant	for	their	nocturnal	ramblings.	When	they	rode	out	into	the	night,	they	bargained	in	the	villages	and
settlements	for	goods	in	the	bazaars	and	sat	hunched	round	communal	fires	sipping	smoky	tea	while	the
elders	told	their	stories.
Sometimes	 Babur	 heard	 them	 inveigh	 against	 himself	 and	 the	 other	 warlords	 who	 made	 the	 lives	 of
ordinary	 men	 so	 precarious.	 At	 first	 such	 comments	 had	 angered	 him,	 but	 now	 he	 listened,	 trying	 to
understand	what	was	in	the	hearts	and	minds	of	his	people.	However,	both	he	and	Baburi	laughed	at	the
outrageous	 rumours	 circulating	 about	 the	 peccadilloes	 of	 those	 in	 the	 fortress.	 Kasim	 –	 Babur’s	 quiet,
unassuming	vizier	–	was	said	to	have	a	male	member	of	which	a	stallion	would	be	proud	but	to	be	able	to
enjoy	sex	only	when	dressed	as	a	woman	and	shackled	to	his	bed.
But	tonight	there	was	an	even	more	potent	attraction	than	a	discussion	of	Kasim’s	appetites.	In	Dzhizak,
the	village	they	were	making	for,	was	a	brothel	they	had	visited	several	times	already	–	a	broken-down
wooden	shack	where	the	women	danced	in	the	firelight,	flaunting	their	wares,	and	the	men	could	take	their
pick.	 At	 the	 thought	 of	 the	 luscious	 breasts	 and	 wide	 hips	 of	 one	 of	 them,	 Yadgar,	 Babur’s	 pulse
quickened.	 In	 daytime	 his	 thoughts	 were	 on	 preparing	 for	 his	 coming	 campaign,	 but	 when	 night	 fell	 he
could	scarcely	contain	his	eagerness	to	gallop	through	the	soft	darkness	to	her.
Yadgar’s	warm,	available	body	and	hot,	questing	mouth	had	revealed	a	new	world	and	taught	him	many
techniques	 and	 sensations.	 She	 was	 so	 different	 from	 Ayisha	 who,	 in	 all	 their	 couplings,	 had	 never
caressed	him.	Her	hands	were	always	clenched	by	her	sides,	her	lips	cold	and	shut	against	him.	Perhaps
if	he	had	been	a	more	experienced	lover	on	his	wedding	night,	things	might	have	been	different	.	.	.	But

that	 was	 in	 the	 past.	 When	 he	 was	 again	 King	 of	 Ferghana	 he	 would	 make	 Yadgar	 his	 concubine.	 He
would	 enjoy	 enhancing	 her	 lush	 beauty	 with	 bright	 gems	 and	 watching	 the	 shimmer	 of	 golden	 chains
against	her	amber	skin,	the	lustre	of	pearls	rising	and	falling	on	the	soft	cushion	of	her	breasts,	moist	with
the	sweat	of	their	lovemaking.	The	thought	made	him	kick	his	pony	on	urgently.
Soon	they	reached	the	willow	grove	that	marked	the	outskirts	of	Dzhizak	and	called	out	to	the	nightwatchman	that	they	were	travellers	in	need	of	refreshment.	After	he	had	examined	their	faces	by	the	light
of	his	guttering	torch	he	grunted	and	let	them	continue.	They	dismounted	and	led	their	ponies	past	the	low,
mud-brick	 houses	 and	 down	 the	 narrow	 alley	 to	 the	 bazaar,	 where	 the	 thin	 yellow	 light	 from	 the
merchants’	 oil	 lamps	 barely	 illumined	 the	 piles	 of	 gritty,	 poor-quality	 rice	 and	 mouldering	 root
vegetables.	 The	 ground	 was	 speckled	 with	 sheep	 and	 goat	 droppings	 and	 a	 sprinkling	 of	 chicken	 turds
deposited	by	a	few	scrawny	hens.
The	brothel	lay	on	the	far	side.	Yes,	Yadgar	was	there.	Babur	could	see	her	warming	her	hands	over	the
dung	fire.	So	was	Baburi’s	usual	choice	–	a	wild	mountain	girl,	boyish	and	slim,	with	red	glints	in	her
hair	and	an	impudent	little	face.
As	 soon	 as	 she	 saw	 them,	 Yadgar	 came	 running,	 the	 cheap	 bells	 on	 her	 sturdy	 ankles	 jingling	 as	 she
leaped	 at	 Babur,	 flinging	 her	 arms	 round	 his	 neck	 as	 her	 mouth	 sought	 his.	 She	 pressed	 herself	 close,
laughing	as	she	felt	his	instant	response.	Taking	him	by	the	hand	she	led	him	inside	the	brothel	where,	in	a
wooden	cubicle	barely	large	enough	for	the	mattress	on	the	floor,	she	shrugged	off	her	clothes	and	went
expertly	 to	 work	 with	 her	 hands	 and	 lips,	 before	 spreading	 her	 thighs	 to	 allow	 him	 to	 enter	 her	 warm,
moist	body.
The	pale	pink	dawn	was	rising	as	Babur	and	Baburi,	sated	and	happy	and	more	than	a	little	drunk	from
the	strong	spirits	served	in	the	brothel,	came	back	within	sight	of	Shahrukiyyah.	They	had	spoken	little	on
the	return	ride	except	to	trade	a	few	frank	comments	about	their	women	and	to	boast	of	the	frequency	and
inventiveness	 of	 their	 own	 performances.	 Inside	 the	 castle,	 Babur	 returned	 to	 his	 apartments,	 waving
away	the	attendants	who	always	seemed	to	materialise	out	of	nowhere	so	that	he	could	savour	a	few	last
moments	of	freedom	and	irresponsibility.
As	 the	 doors	 of	 his	 chamber	 closed	 behind	 him,	 he	 was	 already	 tugging	 off	 his	 clothes.	 He	 was
unprepared	for	a	sharp	blow	to	his	left	ear.	He	turned	to	see	Esan	Dawlat,	hand	still	raised,	eyes	blazing.
Never	had	she	come	to	his	apartments	like	this.	Two	of	her	elderly	waiting	women	were	standing	behind
her,	eyes	downcast	but	half-smiles	on	their	lips.
‘If	you	are	sure	you	and	your	market	boy	have	quite	finished	your	whoring,	we	have	matters	to	discuss,’
his	grandmother	snapped.	‘A	messenger	arrived	during	the	night	from	Samarkand	with	a	letter.	It	is	from
the	chamberlain	of	your	cousin	Mahmud.’	She	flourished	a	bit	of	paper	in	his	face.
‘What	does	my	cousin	say?	Does	he	want	to	make	me	a	present	of	the	kingdom	he	stole?’	Babur	rubbed
his	ear.	He	wasn’t	surprised	Esan	Dawlat	knew	he	had	been	with	a	woman.	She	always	knew	everything.
But	he	felt	embarrassed	she	was	seeing	him	in	peasant	garb,	fresh	from	Yadgar’s	embraces	and	probably
still	smelling	of	her.
‘Your	cousin	says	nothing	–	and	never	will	again	unless	you	count	the	boom	of	a	drum.	Shaibani	Khan
has	 taken	 Samarkand	 and	 had	 Mahmud	 flayed	 alive.	 His	 skin	 has	 been	 made	 into	 a	 drum	 to	 be	 beaten
above	 the	 Turquoise	 Gate	 every	 time	 Shaibani	 Khan	 enters	 and	 leaves	 the	 city.’	 Esan	 Dawlat’s	 shrewd
old	eyes	were	pinpoints	of	anger	at	the	outrage	inflicted	by	an	Uzbek	barbarian	on	a	Timurid	prince.
‘Listen.’	 Squinting,	 she	 began	 to	 read:	 ‘“The	 Uzbeks	 fell	 on	 us	 like	 an	 army	 of	 ants	 devouring
everything	 in	 their	 path.	 They	 overwhelmed	 the	 city’s	 defences	 by	 sheer	 weight	 of	 numbers	 and	 have
butchered	hundreds	of	our	citizens.	Bodies	are	piled	in	the	marketplaces	and	rot	in	the	wells.	I	and	a	few
members	of	the	court	have	survived	in	hiding	thus	far	but	we	are	in	terrible	peril	.	.	.	They	have	left	us

few	places	to	conceal	ourselves.	May	God	show	us	the	mercy	that,	in	his	infinite	wisdom,	he	has	denied
to	others.”’
Babur	felt	instantly	sober.	While	he	had	been	cavorting,	a	thunderbolt	had	struck.	‘I	will	summon	my
council	and	decide	what	to	do.	But	we	must	have	more	information.	The	news	in	that	letter	must	already
be	old.	I	will	send	scouts	westward	.	.	.’
Esan	 Dawlat	 nodded.	 It	 seemed	 there	 was	 nothing	 further	 she	 wished	 to	 say	 to	 him.	 A	 flick	 of	 her
fingers	brought	her	serving	women	to	her	side	and	she	was	heading	for	the	door	of	his	chamber.	Babur
himself	opened	it	for	her	and	watched	her	resolute	figure	walk	briskly	down	the	dimly	lit	passage	back	to
the	women’s	quarters,	her	servants	bobbing	behind	her.
He	washed	quickly,	still	in	shock	at	the	tidings	from	Samarkand.	Despite	everything,	he	would	not	have
wished	 such	 a	 fate	 on	 Mahmud,	 and	 the	 thought	 of	 Shaibani	 Khan’s	 men	 defiling	 Timur’s	 exquisite	 city
and	 murdering	 its	 people	 hurt.	 If	 he’d	 wanted	 revenge	 on	 his	 cousin	 or	 Samarkand’s	 fickle	 citizens,	 he
would	never	have	resorted	to	such	obscene	butchery	.	.	.
Three-quarters	of	an	hour	later,	dressed	once	more	as	befitted	a	king,	Babur	looked	at	his	counsellors,
many	recently	roused	from	sleep	for	this	early-morning	meeting.	On	his	finger	was	Timur’s	ring	–	a	mark
of	the	gravity	of	the	situation.	‘You	have	heard	the	news,	of	course?’
His	counsellors	nodded.
‘I	fear	it	is	true,	but	in	case	it	is	a	trick	to	distract	us	from	attacking	Akhsi,	Baisanghar,	I	want	you	to
send	 scouting	 parties	 west	 towards	 Samarkand	 to	 see	 what	 they	 can	 learn.	 I	 want	 regular	 reports	 of
whatever	they	find	–	even	if	all	seems	peaceful	I	want	to	know.	When	they	reach	the	city,	I	want	a	full
account	of	it.	If	the	Uzbeks	are	indeed	there	I	need	to	know	whether	it	seems	Shaibani	Khan	plans	to	hold
the	city	or	whether	this	was	just	a	raid.	Go	now.’
Baisanghar	rose.
Babur	turned	to	his	scribe.	‘I	must	despatch	a	letter.’	The	man	smoothed	a	piece	of	paper	on	his	writing
block,	then	dipped	his	pen	into	the	onyx	jar	dangling	from	his	neck	on	a	thong	that	held	the	thick	black	ink
he	mixed	each	morning.
‘My	 beloved	 father-in-law,’	 Babur	 began.	 Then	 running	 quickly	 through	 the	 flowery	 courtesies	 –
enquiries	 after	 Ibrahim	 Saru’s	 health	 and	 hopes	 for	 his	 unbounded	 prosperity,	 all	 as	 necessary	 as	 they
were	 insincere,	 he	 cut	 to	 the	 chase:	 ‘In	 your	 beneficence,	 you	 promised	 me	 crossbowmen	 to	 help	 me
regain	 my	 throne	 and	 make	 your	 daughter	 a	 ruling	 queen.	 My	 heart	 grieves	 that,	 despite	 my	 many
entreaties,	those	troops	have	not	yet	come.	Those	around	me	begin	to	whisper	that	perhaps	you	are	not	a
man	of	honour.	I	refuse	to	entertain	such	thoughts.	But	if	you	cannot	assure	me	now	that	your	men	are	on
the	road	to	Shahrukiyyah,	I	shall	be	forced	to	assume	that	you	have,	indeed,	broken	our	agreement.’
He	scratched	his	signature	and	ordered	the	scribe	to	affix	his	seal.	This	was	Ibrahim	Saru’s	last	chance.
It	was	intolerable	that	an	uncouth	tribal	leader	should	toy	with	him.
For	 the	 next	 hour	 Babur	 and	 his	 counsellors,	 grim-faced	 and	 earnest,	 debated,	 but	 without	 more
information	 their	 discussion	 was	 sterile.	 All	 they	 had	 were	 questions	 that	 could	 not	 yet	 be	 answered.
Frustrated,	Babur	dismissed	the	council	but	asked	Wazir	Khan	to	remain.
‘Majesty?’
‘If	Shaibani	Khan	has	taken	Samarkand,	I’ve	been	trying	to	work	out	what	I	would	do	next	if	I	were	him
and	I	keep	reaching	the	same	answer.	I	would	send	my	forces	east	to	destroy	us	here	before	moving	on	to
Akhsi	and	crushing	Jahangir	and	Tambal.	Shaibani	Khan	has	sworn	to	obliterate	the	descendants	of	Timur.
He	would	enjoy	boasting	that	he	had	wiped	out	the	last	two	remnants	of	the	male	line	of	Ferghana.’
For	once	Wazir	Khan	had	no	words	of	comfort.	For	a	while	they	sat	in	silence,	each	locked	in	his	own
thoughts.

But	 at	 least	 they	 didn’t	 have	 to	 wait	 long	 for	 more	 news.	 By	 sunset,	 further	 reports	 were	 reaching
Shahrukiyyah	of	a	momentous	catastrophe	to	the	west.	A	band	of	agitated	merchants	who	had	been	camped
on	the	hills	beyond	Samarkand	brought	tales	of	a	clash	between	horsemen	outside	the	city	walls.	They	had
not	waited	for	the	outcome	but,	gathering	their	pack	animals,	had	fled	eastward.	Other	travellers	brought
stories	 heard	 along	 the	 road	 that	 Shaibani	 Khan	 and	 his	 hordes	 had	 swooped	 down	 from	 the	 north	 and
fallen	on	Samarkand.
The	night	Babur	couldn’t	sleep,	the	still,	warm	air	–	oppressive	and	heavy	–	adding	to	his	restlessness.
Yesterday	he	would	have	sent	for	Baburi	to	amuse	him	with	his	stories	or	to	gallop	with	him	to	the	brothel
and	Yadgar,	but	not	now.	He	sat	alone	by	the	window,	gazing	out.	The	heavy	ring	glinted	on	his	finger.
What	would	Timur	have	done?	Would	he	have	been	prepared	to	wait	passively	to	see	what	fate	dished	out
to	him?	No.	He	would	have	found	a	way	to	take	the	initiative,	to	turn	circumstances	to	his	advantage.
Babur	 continued	 to	 sit,	 jaw	 in	 hand,	 as	 one	 by	 one	 the	 candles	 sputtered	 out	 and	 he	 was	 left	 in	 the
darkness.	 Again	 and	 again,	 he	 kept	 turning	 everything	 over	 in	 his	 mind.	 As	 a	 thin	 line	 of	 golden	 light
appeared	 on	 the	 eastern	 horizon,	 a	 glimmer	 of	 hope	 began	 to	 shine	 in	 the	 dark	 corners	 of	 his	 mind.
Suddenly	he	knew	what	he	would	do.	It	was	a	huge	risk,	and	it	would	cut	him	to	the	heart,	but	it	was	the
only	chance	he	had	.	.	.
As	soon	as	it	was	full	daylight,	he	summoned	his	council.	‘Shaibani	Khan	is	a	threat	to	the	entire	House
of	Timur.	If	he	wipes	me	out	he	will	turn	next	on	my	half-brother	Jahangir.	It	will	be	only	a	matter	of	time.
He	wants	all	the	Timurid	lands	and	he	will	have	them	–	unless	we	put	aside	our	own	quarrels.	That	is
why	I	intend	to	offer	Jahangir	and	Tambal	an	alliance.	If	they	and	the	clans	loyal	to	them	will	help	me
push	the	Uzbeks	out	of	Samarkand,	I	will	relinquish	Ferghana	to	them	.	.	.’
Wazir	Khan’s	sharp	intake	of	breath	told	Babur	how	much	he	had	shocked	him.	‘But,	Majesty—’
‘It	is	the	only	way.	Kasim,	you	will	be	my	ambassador.’
Babur	 looked	 sternly	 at	 his	 council,	 feeling	 a	 new	 steeliness	 within	 him.	 ‘For	 the	 moment,	 until	 we
have	an	answer	from	Akhsi,	you	will	say	nothing	of	this	to	anyone.	Those	are	my	orders.’
As	Babur	rose,	he	saw	how	troubled	Wazir	Khan	looked.	In	former	days	he	would	have	talked	through
his	plans	with	his	old	friend	to	try	to	convince	him.	But	no	one	could	help	him	now.	This	was	his	destiny,
his	choice.	If	his	boldness	worked,	he	would	again	be	in	golden	Samarkand.	He	had	never	ceased	to	think
of	it	as	his	rightful	property	or	to	mourn	its	loss,	this	place	his	father	had	ached	to	possess	and	to	which
mountainous	little	Ferghana,	with	its	unruly	chiefs	and	bleating	sheep,	had	always	been	a	poor	second.	If
he	was	to	succeed	where	his	father	had	not,	ambition,	not	sentiment,	must	be	his	watchword.

The	 following	 days	 brought	 further	 trickles,	 then	 a	 stream,	 and	 finally	 a	 flood	 of	 refugees	 to	 the
settlements	 around	 Shahrukiyyah.	 Babur	 sent	 men	 to	 question	 them	 and	 learned	 that	 most	 were	 from
villages	near	Samarkand.	Ominously,	few	were	from	the	city	itself	and	there	was	no	sign	of	Mahmud’s
chamberlain	who	had	written	in	such	despair.	Neither	was	there	any	news	of	Mahmud’s	wife,	the	grand
vizier’s	daughter	.	.	.
From	 the	 battlements,	 Babur	 watched	 the	 drab	 procession	 of	 travel-stained,	 weary	 people,	 who	 had
simply	grabbed	what	they	could	and	fled	for	their	lives	–	old	men	and	snotty-nosed	infants	loaded	onto
carts,	some	of	which	had	been	hauled	the	one	hundred	and	fifty	miles	by	hand,	desperate-looking	mothers
clutching	 babies	 to	 their	 skinny	 breasts.	 All	 hungry	 mouths	 –	 a	 burden	 not	 a	 help.	 Babur	 ordered
distributions	from	his	granaries	and	those	of	the	other	fortresses	he	held,	but	even	those	supplies	would

not	last	for	long.
He	had	hoped	that	some	of	the	soldiers	of	Samarkand	might	have	managed	to	flee	the	Uzbeks	and	would
make	their	way	eastwards,	but	the	reports	arriving	from	Baisanghar’s	scouts	blasted	any	such	idea.	It	was
clear	 there	 had	 been	 great	 slaughter	 as	 the	 Uzbeks	 had	 hacked	 and	 hewn	 their	 way	 to	 victory.	 The
meadows	around	Samarkand	were	strewn	with	the	bloated	corpses	of	its	soldiers.	Few	had	escaped.	Only
an	army	of	ghosts	would	march	to	Babur’s	assistance.
Everything	now	depended	on	Jahangir	and	Tambal.	Should	he	have	ridden	to	them	himself	under	a	flag
of	 truce?	 he	 wondered.	 Would	 Kasim	 convince	 Jahangir	 and	 Tambal	 that	 their	 best	 –	 perhaps	 only	 –
chance	of	survival	lay	in	accepting	his	offer	of	a	peace	settlement	and	an	alliance	against	Shaibani	Khan
or	would	they	be	blinded	to	the	threat	of	Shaibani	Khan	by	their	suspicion	of	his	own	motives?
He	was	with	his	mother	and	grandmother	when	he	heard	that	Kasim	had	returned.	Without	explanation,
and	avoiding	Esan	Dawlat’s	sharp	eyes,	he	hurried	to	his	chambers	where	he	had	ordered	his	ambassador
to	 be	 brought.	 Kasim	 was	 his	 usual	 quiet,	 self-possessed	 self,	 betraying	 not	 a	 hint	 of	 excitement	 or
agitation	about	the	news	he	was	carrying.
‘Well?’	It	was	all	Babur	could	do	not	to	grab	him	by	the	shoulders.
‘I	 bring	 an	 answer,	 Majesty.	 They	 accept	 your	 terms.’	 Now,	 at	 last,	 Kasim	 allowed	 himself	 a	 faint
smile.	‘See,	Majesty.’	From	a	dark-red	camelskin	bag,	fastened	with	plugs	of	ivory,	he	extracted	a	letter.
Babur	scanned	it	and	his	heart	beat	faster.	Yes!	Passing	over	the	empty	courtesies	he	found	what	he	was
looking	for.	He	read	the	words	to	himself	several	times,	savouring	them.	‘What	you	propose,	my	brother,
is	the	only	way	to	save	us	all	from	the	Uzbek	menace.	By	the	time	you	receive	this,	my	troops	will	already
be	preparing	to	march	to	Shahrukiyyah.	I	am	sending	you	four	thousand	cavalry	and	a	thousand	archers,	all
that	I	can	spare.’	It	was	signed	by	Jahangir	and	stamped	with	the	royal	seal	of	Ferghana.
It	cost	Babur	a	pang	to	run	his	fingers	over	the	thick	wax	–	the	right	to	affix	the	royal	seal	was	his:	by
blood	and	birth	he	was	King	of	Ferghana.	But	he	had	made	his	choice	and	must	abide	by	it.	He	must	also
trust	Jahangir	and	his	controller,	Tambal,	to	keep	their	word.	If	they	betrayed	him	now,	they	would	all	be
ruined.

	
	
	

Chapter	10
An	Ancient	Foe
	

Babur	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 the	 lines	 of	 riders	 strung	 out	 behind	 him,	 their	 brilliant	 yellow	 banners
proclaiming	them	all	warriors	of	Ferghana.	Tribal	and	dynastic	feuds	forgotten,	they	were	riding	against
an	ancient	enemy.	Three	hours	earlier,	in	their	apartments	in	the	fortress,	Esan	Dawlat	and	Kutlugh	Nigar
had	given	him	their	blessing	and	his	mother	had	pressed	her	lips	to	the	eagle	hilt	of	his	father’s	sword,
Alamgir,	hanging	from	his	metal-studded	belt.	He	was	surprised	that	they	had	not	objected	to	his	bargain
with	his	half-brother	–	Esan	Dawlat	had	actually	commended	his	vision	and	daring.	Only	Khanzada	had
seemed	shaken	at	the	thought	that	she	might	never	again	see	her	childhood	home	of	Akhsi.
As	for	Ayisha,	he	had	gone	to	her	last	night	for	one	final,	brief	encounter.	If	he	did	not	return,	he	might
at	least	be	leaving	an	heir	inside	her,	he	had	thought,	thrusting	energetically	but	joylessly,	his	eyes	fixed	on
the	wall	rather	than	on	her	expressionless,	half-averted	face.	As	soon	as	he	had	reached	his	shuddering
climax,	Ayisha	had	done	what	she	now	always	did	–	rolled	away	from	him	and	pulled	the	coverlet	over
her	nakedness.	He	had	not	looked	at	her	as	he	dressed	hurriedly	and	left	her	chamber	immediately	without
either	speaking	a	single	word	of	comfort	or	farewell.	They	would	never	be	other	than	emotional	strangers.
At	 least	 her	 father	 had	 come	 to	 his	 senses.	 Towards	 the	 rear	 of	 the	 long	 column,	 beyond	 the	 yellow
pennants	 of	 Ferghana,	 were	 the	 ranks	 of	 mounted	 Mangligh	 crossbowmen	 in	 black	 and	 red.	 They	 had
arrived	 at	 Shahrukiyyah	 within	 days	 of	 Ibrahim	 Saru	 getting	 wind	 of	 the	 alliance	 between	 Babur	 and
Jahangir	against	Shaibani	Khan.
Wazir	 Khan	 and	 Baisanghar	 were	 riding	 by	 his	 side	 and	 somewhere	 among	 the	 ranks	 of	 his	 cavalry
would	be	Baburi.	He	had	not	spoken	more	than	a	word	or	two	to	his	friend	since	the	news	of	the	fall	of
Samarkand	and	missed	his	light-hearted	company.	But	companionship	–	friendship	–	was	perhaps	not	for
kings,	whose	minds	must	be	fixed	on	greater	things,	Babur	reflected.
They	were	travelling	quickly,	galloping	over	ground	baked	hard	by	the	heat	of	summer.	They	were	also
travelling	 light.	 Babur	 had	 decided	 there	 was	 no	 time	 to	 transport	 cumbersome	 siege	 engines.	 He	 was
staking	everything	on	a	swift	surprise	attack.	Till	now	Samarkand	had	always	been	in	the	hands	of	one
Timurid	 ruler	 or	 another.	 The	 citizens	 of	 Samarkand	 –	 those	 left	 alive	 –	 should	 be	 desperate	 to	 rid
themselves	of	a	cruel,	alien	predator	like	Shaibani	Khan.	When	they	saw	his	forces	approach,	he	hoped
they	would	rise	against	their	oppressors.
What	really	counted,	though,	were	Shaibani	Khan’s	plans.	With	autumn	almost	upon	him,	did	he	intend
to	winter	in	Samarkand?	Babur	frowned	as	he	rode,	his	chestnut’s	hoofs	beating	a	rhythmic	tattoo,	trying
to	put	himself	inside	the	mind	of	his	enemy.	What	did	he	really	want?	To	rape	and	loot	Samarkand	and
then	 return	 with	 his	 pack	 of	 marauders	 back	 to	 the	 northern	 steppes	 to	 enjoy	 his	 booty,	 or	 did	 he	 have
grander	 ambitions?	 Was	 his	 attack	 on	 Samarkand	 simply	 a	 sustained	 raid	 or	 had	 he	 come	 to	 stay	 to
establish	a	dynasty	and	empire	of	his	own?
If	the	stories	Babur	had	heard	in	his	boyhood	were	true,	Shaibani	Khan	bore	Samarkand	a	grudge.	He
recalled	his	father’s	tales	of	how,	as	a	boy,	Shaibani	Khan	had	been	captured	during	a	raid	by	the	King	of
Samarkand’s	forces	on	an	Uzbek	settlement.	His	father	and	brothers	had	been	killed	but,	at	scarcely	more

than	ten,	he	had	been	dragged	at	a	camel’s	tail,	a	leather	thong	round	his	neck,	as	a	slave	to	Samarkand.
Quick-witted	and	clever,	he	had	survived	the	harsh	conditions	in	the	blacksmiths’	workshops,	where	the
symbol	of	the	slave	had	been	burned	into	his	left	cheek,	and	had	come	to	the	attention	of	a	courtier	in	the
Kok	Saray.
The	nobleman	had	had	him	educated	and	given	him	a	good	position	as	a	scribe,	but	had	also	forced	him
to	share	his	bed.	One	night	the	young	Shaibani	Khan	had	slit	his	master’s	throat.	Dipping	his	finger	in	the
murdered	 man’s	 blood,	 he	 had	 written	 his	 final	 missive	 as	 a	 scribe;	 a	 message	 scrawled	 on	 the	 wall,
calling	down	a	curse	on	the	city.	He	had	vanished	back	to	his	own	people.	Reunited	with	his	clan,	he	had
risen	 to	 become	 overlord	 of	 all	 the	 Uzbeks	 and	 still	 nursed	 a	 brooding	 hatred	 for	 the	 royal	 House	 of
Timur.	He	was	now	a	man	of	some	thirty-five	summers	and	in	his	prime,	a	formidable	enemy	who	cast	a
dark	shadow	before	him	and	left	death	in	his	wake.	Defeating	such	a	man	would	not	be	easy	.	.	.
Guile	rather	than	force	might	be	the	answer.	Within	some	four	days,	if	they	could	keep	up	their	pace,
they	would	be	within	striking	distance	of	Samarkand.	To	retain	any	advantage	of	surprise,	he	would	have
to	attack	at	once.	But	perhaps	it	would	be	better	to	make	Shaibani	Khan	uncertain	of	his	intentions	–	or,
best	of	all,	to	mislead	him.	If	he	could	convince	him	he	was	trying	to	break	out	of	Ferghana	–	to	bypass
Samarkand	and	travel	west	–	he	might	draw	his	enemy	away	from	the	city.
That	evening,	as	Babur	sat	at	a	campfire	with	Wazir	Khan	and	Baisanghar,	he	stared	into	the	flames,
still	seeking	inspiration.	The	ground	where	they	had	made	camp	was	sandy.	Suddenly	he	rose,	picked	up	a
stick	 and	 traced	 the	 outline	 of	 Samarkand	 –	 the	 five-mile	 girdle	 of	 walls	 pierced	 by	 the	 six	 gates,	 the
surrounding	 patchwork	 of	 meadows,	 orchards	 and	 gardens,	 the	 tracery	 of	 streams	 and	 rivers	 on	 the
eastern	and	northern	sides.	‘What	if	we	sent	a	detachment	of	our	men	along	the	far	side	of	the	Ab-i-Siyah
river,	parallel	with	the	northern	walls	of	Samarkand	.	.	.	They	would	be	visible	to	those	guarding	the	Iron
and	the	Shaykhzada	gates	but	still	too	far	off	for	the	Uzbeks	to	gauge	their	strength	accurately.	We	might
make	them	think	it	was	our	entire	army	.	.	.’
‘And	then,	Majesty?’	Baisanghar	asked.
‘If	we	are	lucky,	the	Uzbeks	will	ride	out	in	pursuit	–	and	we	will	have	our	chance.	If	we	conceal	the
remainder	of	our	men	in	the	scrubland	that	borders	the	Kan-i-Gil	meadow,	east	of	the	Iron	Gate,	we’ll	be
able	to	see	what	is	happening	and	–	if	God	is	with	us	and	the	Uzbeks	are	indeed	deceived	–	attack	the
eastern	walls	of	the	city	by	the	Turquoise	Gate.’
Wazir	Khan	was	staring	thoughtfully	at	the	map	in	the	sand,	through	which	a	line	of	long-bodied	ants,
disciplined	as	soldiers,	was	tramping,	some	carrying	leaf	shreds,	to	their	nest.	‘The	detachment	that	tries
to	lure	the	Uzbeks	out	of	the	city	must	be	our	best	and	fastest	horsemen.	They	must	be	able	to	outride	their
pursuers,	circle	round	and	re-join	the	main	force	to	help	in	the	attack	on	the	city.’
‘Yes.’	Baisanghar	nodded	vigorously.	‘They	would	need	to	work	their	way	south	and	east	like	this	.	.	.’
With	 his	 left	 hand,	 he	 picked	 up	 the	 stick	 Babur	 had	 thrown	 down	 and	 scratched	 arrows	 in	 the	 sand,
sweeping	past	the	Chaharraha	Gate	round	the	southern	walls	and	up	past	the	Needlemaker’s	Gate	towards
the	Turquoise	Gate.	In	so	doing	he	disturbed	and	killed	some	of	the	marching	ants,	but	the	remainder	reformed	and	continued	as	though	nothing	had	happened.
‘But	it	would	be	risky,	Majesty.’	Baisanghar	looked	anxious.	‘We	have	little	knowledge	of	how	many
Uzbeks	 are	 in	 the	 city	 or	 of	 their	 defences.	 Even	 if	 we	 succeed	 in	 tempting	 some	 out	 of	 the	 city,	 the
defenders	may	still	be	too	many	for	us	to	overwhelm.	Perhaps	we	should	first	try	to	send	in	spies.’
‘As	I	was	once	a	spy?’	Babur	thought	of	how	he	had	crept	like	a	sewer	rat	into	the	city.	‘No,	we	don’t
have	time.	If	we	are	to	trick	the	Uzbeks	we	must	be	quick	and	take	the	risk.’
Babur	 was	 certain	 he	 was	 right,	 but	 if	 his	 plan	 failed,	 what	 would	 the	 consequences	 be?	 That	 was
something	he	refused	to	contemplate.	There	was	an	ancient	proverb	in	Ferghana:	‘Who	dares	not	take	his

chance	will	regret	it	until	old	age.’
Better	to	have	no	old	age	than	to	spend	his	life	in	regret.

Three	days	later	–	they	had	covered	the	one	hundred	and	fifty	miles	even	faster	than	Babur	had	hoped	–
Samarkand	lay	just	beyond	the	next	rows	of	hills	that	were	now	scorched	brown	by	the	heat	of	summer	but
in	a	few	weeks	would	begin	to	be	silvered	with	frost.	For	the	past	three	hours,	on	Babur’s	express	orders,
his	men	had	ridden	at	no	faster	than	a	trot	and	in	silence.	Scouts	despatched	to	scour	the	landscape	for
potential	ambushes	had	returned	at	regular	intervals	to	report	that	they	had	seen	nothing,	heard	nothing,	to
alarm	them.
Nevertheless,	 Babur	 would	 take	 no	 chances.	 The	 Uzbeks	 were	 formidable	 fighters,	 with	 the	 guile	 of
foxes	desperate	for	fresh	meat.	And	that	was	how	they	killed	–	as	indiscriminately	as	a	fox	in	a	hen	house
that	slaughters	every	bird	but	steals	off	with	only	one	between	its	jaws.
As	 purple	 dusk	 softened	 the	 landscape,	 the	 silent	 lines	 of	 riders	 at	 last	 approached	 Qolba	 Hill	 –	 the
highest	of	the	final	range	before	Samarkand,	from	which	Babur	had	first	glimpsed	the	city	more	than	five
years	 earlier.	 This	 time,	 instead	 of	 heading	 for	 the	 summit,	 he	 called	 a	 halt,	 summoned	 Wazir	 Khan,
Baisanghar	 and	 his	 other	 chieftains,	 then	 gave	 his	 final	 orders.	 ‘Using	 Qolba	 Hill	 to	 give	 us	 cover,	 we
will	ride	westward	and	camp	under	cover	of	the	trees	bordering	the	Qolba	meadow	where	we	will	make
our	final	preparations.	We	will	light	no	fires	for	fear	of	giving	away	our	position.	Just	before	the	sun	rises
tomorrow,	Baisanghar,	you	will	be	our	decoy.	Take	three	hundred	of	our	best	horsemen,	ride	down	to	the
banks	of	the	Ab-i-Siyah,	then	head	west.	Make	sure	you	are	seen	from	the	city	walls.	The	morning	mists
will	 make	 it	 difficult	 for	 the	 guards	 to	 estimate	 your	 numbers	 accurately.	 Take	 no	 risks.	 Don’t	 ford	 the
river	until	you	are	beyond	the	Shaykhzada	Gate.	I	depend	on	you	to	re-join	us	and	help	in	the	assault	on
the	city	walls	by	the	Turquoise	Gate	no	more	than	four	hours	after	we	part.
‘Wazir	 Khan,	 as	 soon	 as	 we	 see	 that	 the	 Uzbeks	 have	 taken	 the	 bait	 and	 are	 riding	 in	 pursuit	 of
Baisanghar,	we	will	attack	the	walls	from	the	east.	Once	we	are	inside,	my	orders	are	to	kill	every	Uzbek
we	find	–	give	no	quarter	as	they	gave	none	to	our	people	–	but	treat	the	citizens	of	Samarkand	and	their
property	with	respect.	They	are	my	subjects.’
‘Yes,	 Majesty.’	 His	 commanders	 nodded,	 each	 man	 seeming	 wrapped	 in	 his	 thoughts,	 perhaps
wondering	 whether	 he	 would	 live	 to	 see	 another	 dawn.	 Shaibani	 Khan	 had	 never	 been	 defeated	 on	 the
battlefield.	But	this	was	a	trial	of	wits	as	well	as	weapons,	and	the	thought	gave	Babur	renewed	courage.

It	 was	 half	 an	 hour	 since	 Baisanghar	 and	 his	 men	 had	 departed.	 Babur	 rested	 his	 back	 against	 a	 wellgrown	 apple	 tree	 whose	 branches	 sagged	 with	 fruit,	 their	 ripe	 scent	 making	 him	 think	 for	 a	 moment	 of
Yadgar.	Dawn	mists	softened	the	outlines	of	trees	and	bushes.	The	poles	for	the	scaling	ladders	had	been
cut	and	the	ladders	fashioned	wide	enough	for	three	men	to	climb	abreast.	They	would	be	carried	to	the
attack	 between	 pairs	 of	 horses.	 Wazir	 Khan	 was	 kneeling	 in	 silent	 prayer,	 every	 few	 moments	 bending
forward	to	touch	his	forehead	to	the	ground.
Perhaps	he,	too,	should	be	praying,	Babur	wondered.	Instead	he	allowed	himself	a	few	moments’	quiet
contemplation,	but	then	returned	to	thoughts	of	action.	His	scouts	had	reported	no	sign	of	any	large	Uzbek
encampment	 outside	 the	 city	 walls.	 Perhaps	 that	 meant	 some	 of	 Shaibani	 Khan’s	 forces	 had	 already

moved	 on.	 The	 temptation	 –	 now	 that	 Samarkand	 had	 fallen	 –	 to	 pillage	 the	 surrounding	 villages	 and
settlements	 would	 be	 great	 for	 some	 of	 his	 ill-disciplined	 troops.	 With	 luck,	 it	 would	 not	 have	 entered
Shaibani	Khan’s	arrogant	head	that	anyone	would	dare	attack	him	and	he	would	have	been	content	to	let
them	go.
Suddenly,	Babur	thought	he	heard	something	and	it	jerked	him	from	his	reflections.	Leaping	to	his	feet,
and	half-skidding	on	rotting	windfall	apples,	he	peered	through	the	trees.	In	the	distance,	above	the	mist
shrouding	the	river,	he	could	make	out	the	familiar	walls	of	Samarkand	and	–	here	and	there	–	pinpricks
of	light	on	the	battlements.
Then,	as	he	strained	his	eyes	and	ears,	he	heard	it	again:	the	deep,	rhythmic	throbbing	of	a	drum,	then
more	 drums.	 Suddenly	 the	 battlements	 were	 alive	 with	 moving	 dots	 as	 figures	 ran	 hither	 and	 thither.
Baisanghar	and	his	men	must	have	been	spotted,	as	intended,	as	they	circled	westward.	Would	Shaibani
Khan	take	the	bait?
‘Tell	your	men	to	be	ready	to	ride	but	no	man	is	to	move	until	I	give	the	order,’	Babur	said	in	a	low
voice	to	his	commanders,	who	had	gathered	around	him,	listening,	like	him,	to	the	drums.
The	thudding	had	settled	into	a	heavy,	ominous	rhythm.	Babur	hoped	it	wasn’t	Mahmud	Khan’s	flayed
skin	he	could	hear	being	beaten.	As	the	minutes	passed,	the	uncertainty	was	growing	intolerable.	Under
cover	of	the	mist,	Babur	moved	forward	to	get	a	better	view	and	concealed	himself	in	a	coppice	nearer
the	walls.	As	far	as	he	could	tell	from	his	new	vantage	point,	the	Iron	Gate	and,	beyond	it,	the	Shaykhzada
Gate	–	closest	to	where	Baisanghar	and	his	men,	Baburi	among	them,	had	passed	–	were	still	shut.	But
then,	when	Babur	thought	he	could	stand	the	suspense	no	longer,	the	portcullis	over	the	Iron	Gate	began	to
rise.	As	soon	as	it	was	high	enough,	a	stream	of	horsemen,	two	abreast,	cantered	out	and,	wheeling	northwestwards,	broke	into	a	gallop.	On	and	on	the	column	came	–	at	least	four	hundred	warriors,	he	thought,
in	near	ecstasy.	When,	finally,	the	last	riders	had	disappeared	wraithlike	into	the	mist	there	was	a	pause.
Babur	 expected	 the	 Iron	 Gate	 to	 be	 lowered	 but	 instead	 a	 single	 man	 rode	 slowly	 out.	 A	 few	 paces
beyond	the	gate,	he	reined	in	his	horse	and	turned	his	head	from	left	to	right.	He	appeared	to	be	snuffing
the	air,	as	hunting	dogs	did	before	they	gave	chase.	For	a	moment,	the	lone	rider	seemed	to	be	looking
across	 the	 low-lying	 fields	 and	 meadows	 through	 the	 mist	 straight	 at	 him,	 though	 he	 knew	 that	 was
impossible.
Babur	had	little	doubt	as	to	who	it	was	–	Shaibani	Khan	himself.	What	would	the	Uzbek	leader	do?
Finally	the	rider	raised	his	hand.	As	yet	more	warriors	surged	through	the	Iron	Gate	behind	him,	he	kicked
his	horse	and,	calling	to	his	men	with	a	harsh	cry	that,	though	faint	by	the	time	it	reached	him,	Babur	could
still	 hear,	 disappeared	 north-west.	 After	 another	 couple	 of	 minutes,	 all	 the	 riders	 had	 gone	 and	 the
portcullis	was	being	slowly	lowered	back	into	place.
Curbing	 his	 impatience,	 Babur	 returned	 to	 the	 main	 body	 of	 his	 troops	 and	 signalled	 yet	 again	 to	 his
men	to	stay	quiet	and	still.	If	they	moved	into	the	open	too	quickly,	sounds	of	alarm	from	the	city	might	yet
reach	Shaibani	Khan	and	bring	him	back.	Wazir	Khan	was	using	the	time	to	tighten	his	horse’s	girths	and
check	 his	 weapons	 –	 sword,	 dagger	 and	 throwing	 axe.	 Grateful	 for	 his	 old	 mentor’s	 calmness	 and
commonsense,	Babur	did	the	same.	On	his	shoulder	was	his	leather	quiver	and	it	gave	him	confidence	to
run	his	fingers	over	the	sharp	tips	of	his	long,	newly	fletched	arrows.	He	took	his	curved	bow	from	its
case	and	tried	the	tautness	of	the	string,	grunting	with	satisfaction	at	the	tension	in	the	oiled	sinew.	It	felt
as	tightly	strung	as	he	did.
Finally	the	moment	came.	All	was	quiet	again	on	the	battlements,	and	Shaibani	Khan’s	force	must	now
be	well	beyond	earshot.
‘	We	ride!’	shouted	Babur,	his	voice	raw	with	excitement.	Leaping	on	to	his	horse	he	rode	clear	of	the
trees	and	waited	as	his	men	formed	up.	His	bodyguard,	under	Wazir	Khan,	was	immediately	behind	him,

then	 the	 pairs	 of	 riders	 bringing	 the	 ladders,	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 cavalry	 and	 finally	 Ibrahim	 Saru’s	 mounted
crossbowmen.
Babur	dug	in	his	heels	and	his	horse	leaped	forward.	They	tore	south	across	the	meadows	through	the
dispersing	mists,	the	city	walls	on	their	right	as	they	made	for	the	Turquoise	Gate.	They	were	on	the	far
side	of	the	river	that	flowed	past	the	walls	but	this	time	they	had	no	need	to	ford	it.	A	wide,	strong	bridge
of	wooden	planks	–	newly	built,	no	doubt,	by	the	Uzbeks	–	stood	three	hundred	yards	upstream	from	the
Turquoise	Gate.
Babur	and	his	men	thundered	over	it	and	made	straight	for	the	gate.	As	shouts	of	alarm	rang	out	from	the
battlements,	the	Mangligh	crossbowmen	sent	up	volley	after	volley	of	bolts.	Within	minutes	the	ladders
were	against	the	walls	at	their	lowest	point,	on	either	side	of	the	Turquoise	Gate.	Looking	up	as	he	began
to	climb,	Babur	was	astonished	to	see	not	a	single	defender.
It	 was	 a	 matter	 of	 moments	 to	 scale	 the	 ladder	 and	 climb	 the	 last	 few	 feet	 by	 grabbing	 on	 to	 the
stonework.	 There	 was	 hardly	 room	 to	 move,	 let	 alone	 draw	 a	 sword,	 as	 his	 warriors	 swarmed	 around
him.	But	of	Uzbek	defenders	–	apart	from	those	lying	dead	with	Mangligh	bolts	sticking	into	them	like	a
porcupine’s	quills	–	there	remained	no	sign.
Then	a	volley	of	arrows	from	a	strong	point	about	a	hundred	yards	away	revealed	that	not	all	the	Uzbek
defenders	 had	 fled.	 A	 black-feathered	 arrow	 struck	 Babur’s	 domed	 helmet	 a	 glancing	 blow.	 Another
embedded	itself	deep	in	the	thigh	of	a	man	behind	him.	A	third	penetrated	the	cheek	of	a	soldier	who	was
clambering	from	a	ladder	over	the	battlements	on	to	the	wall.	Blood	pouring	out	of	his	mouth,	he	lost	his
grip	and,	falling	backwards	from	the	wall,	took	the	man	climbing	below	with	him	in	his	death	fall	to	the
rocky	ground	beneath.
Babur	 raised	 his	 shield	 to	 protect	 himself	 from	 the	 next	 volley	 and,	 yelling	 for	 his	 men	 to	 follow,
charged	towards	the	strong	point.	Two	more	arrows	thudded	into	his	shield	but	the	thick	hide	and	wood
did	its	work.	However,	behind	Babur	a	young	soldier	fell,	an	arrow	in	his	neck.	Then	Babur	was	in	the
strong	point,	which	had	no	door.	He	slashed	at	the	first	man	he	encountered	before	he	could	drop	his	bow
and	 pull	 out	 his	 sword.	 A	 second	 had	 his	 fingers	 on	 his	 sword	 hilt	 but	 Babur	 gave	 him	 a	 slashing	 cut
across	the	wrist,	almost	severing	his	hand.	The	man	turned	and	ran	out	of	the	opposite	doorway	and	along
the	walls	towards	the	gatehouse	of	the	Turquoise	Gate	another	fifty	yards	away.
The	other	occupants	of	the	strong	point	tried	to	follow,	but	Babur	and	his	men	killed	two	as	they	tried	to
extricate	themselves	from	the	close-quarters	mêlée.	His	archers	brought	down	two	more	as	they	rushed
for	the	gatehouse,	although	one	succeeded	in	half-staggering,	half-crawling	into	its	protective	embrace.
‘Majesty,	we’ve	put	them	to	flight!’
Babur	 turned	 to	 see	 Wazir	 Khan,	 breathing	 heavily	 but	 triumphant,	 dagger	 in	 one	 hand	 and	 bloodied
sword	in	the	other.	‘Not	quite.	Post	guards	to	hold	this	section	of	the	walls	and	the	gate.	You	are	to	stay
here	in	command.	Meanwhile	I	and	the	rest	of	the	men	will	try	to	get	into	the	gatehouse	to	open	the	gate	to
the	rest	of	our	troops.’
Wazir	Khan	looked	abashed	but	Babur	was	not	going	to	risk	his	increasingly	lame	counsellor	in	street
fighting	when	a	man’s	ability	to	run	fast	might	make	the	difference	between	life	and	death.
Shield	 in	 front	 of	 his	 head	 and	 running	 bent	 double,	 Babur	 covered	 the	 fifty	 yards	 to	 the	 gatehouse.
Inside,	 he	 found	 that	 the	 only	 Uzbek	 left	 was	 the	 man	 who	 had	 almost	 lost	 his	 hand.	 He	 had	 collapsed
against	the	wall,	breathing	heavily	and	cursing	in	his	pain	as	his	lifeblood	pumped	from	his	wound	on	to
the	stone	floor.	The	clatter	of	feet	from	the	stairs	leading	down	to	the	gate	told	Babur	where	the	rest	of	the
defenders	 had	 gone.	 He	 and	 his	 men	 followed	 cautiously,	 fearing	 an	 attack	 as	 they	 emerged	 from	 the
staircase,	but	none	came.
‘Smash	the	lock	and	open	the	gate,’	Babur	yelled.

Axes	ready,	two	of	his	bodyguard	ran	to	carry	out	the	order.	There	was	the	sound	of	metal	against	metal
as	they	slammed	their	axes	into	the	lock	and	a	final	crash	showed	they	had	succeeded.	Soon,	the	ancient,
iron-studded	gate	was	swinging	open	to	admit	the	remainder	of	Babur’s	troops,	including	the	Mangligh
crossbowmen.
With	 Alamgir	 in	 his	 hand,	 Babur	 glanced	 about.	 It	 was	 very	 quiet.	 Where	 were	 the	 Uzbeks	 hiding?
Babur	put	caution	aside	and	advanced	up	the	wide	street,	yelling,	‘Ferghana!	Ferghana!’
His	shouts	echoed	in	the	silence.	There	was	no	volley	of	arrows	or	even	an	answering	cry	of	Uzbek
defiance.	Then,	to	Babur’s	astonishment,	doors	and	shutters	began	to	open.	He	darted	for	cover	and	again
reached	 for	 his	 bow	 and	 an	 arrow,	 but	 the	 heads	 poking	 out	 were	 not	 those	 of	 Uzbek	 warriors.	 They
belonged	to	the	ordinary	people	of	Samarkand	–	merchants,	shopkeepers,	innkeepers	–	who,	recognising
Babur,	 were	 calling	 out	 blessings	 upon	 him	 and	 his	 men,	 thanking	 them	 for	 their	 liberation.	 Soon	 they
were	pouring	from	their	houses,	almost	insane	in	their	joy	and	jubilation
‘Quick!	This	way!’	a	man	was	calling.	‘I	saw	one	of	those	Uzbeks	run	up	here.’	He	pointed	to	a	narrow
alleyway	where	tell-tale	drops	of	blood	were	already	congealing	in	the	dust.	Before	Babur	could	order
his	men	to	investigate,	two	ordinary	citizens	–	one	burly	enough	to	be	a	butcher	and	the	other	a	smaller,
wiry	man	with	a	wart	on	the	side	of	his	nose	–	disappeared	in	that	direction.	Within	moments	they	had
reappeared,	dragging	a	young	Uzbek	by	the	legs	so	that	his	head	banged	along	the	ground.	A	Mangligh	bolt
was	protruding	from	his	chest,	and	as	he	struggled	for	breath,	he	begged	for	mercy.	Before	Babur	could
say	anything,	the	burly	man	drew	his	knife	and	cut	the	boy’s	throat	from	ear	to	ear,	beaming	as	the	warm
blood	splashed	his	boots.
All	 around,	 citizens	 were	 arming	 themselves	 with	 anything	 they	 could	 find	 –	 stones,	 pitchforks,
blacksmith’s	 tools	 .	 .	 .	 A	 light	 in	 their	 eyes	 reminded	 Babur	 of	 wild	 dogs	 as	 they	 ran	 with	 him	 and	 his
troops	through	the	streets,	searching	for	Uzbeks	and	continuing	to	stab	and	club	any	they	found	long	after
they	were	dead,	so	great	was	their	hatred,	so	bad	had	been	the	treatment	they	had	received.
But	apart	from	those	injured	on	the	walls	who	had	not	been	able	to	get	far,	there	were	few	–	and	still	no
resistance.	The	Uzbeks	must	be	fleeing	before	them.	Reaching	the	Registan	Square,	Babur	called	a	halt.
Maybe	the	Uzbeks	were	convinced	he	had	attacked	with	a	much	greater	force	than	he	had	or	perhaps	this
was	 a	 trap	 and	 they	 were	 waiting	 in	 ambush	 a	 little	 way	 ahead.	 Babur	 consulted	 briefly	 with	 his
commanders,	then	ordered	detachments	of	soldiers	to	advance	cautiously	into	the	west,	north	and	east	of
the	city.
By	 now	 it	 was	 mid-morning	 and	 beneath	 a	 streaked	 and	 brilliant	 sky	 more	 and	 more	 people	 were
surging	into	the	square.	They	were	carrying	food	–	bread,	fruit,	even	skins	of	wine	–	which	they	thrust	on
Babur’s	men.	A	babble	of	excited	voices	was	rising	all	around	him.	This	was	chaos	–	what	if	the	Uzbeks
were	regrouping	and	about	to	counter-attack?	Babur’s	men	could	not	fight	amid	this	throng.
Babur	 ordered	 his	 guards	 to	 push	 back	 the	 jubilant	 people.	 Making	 barriers	 of	 their	 spears,	 his
warriors	advanced,	shoulder	to	shoulder,	and	slowly	succeeded	in	driving	the	crowds	back,	clearing	the
entries	and	exits	to	the	square.	That	was	better.	‘I	want	all	of	these	buildings	searched,	and	men	posted	at
every	high	vantage-point	around	the	square,’	Babur	ordered.	Even	now	Uzbek	archers	might	be	concealed
among	all	the	blue-tiled	domes	and	minarets	of	the	palaces,	mosques	and	madrasas	bounding	the	square,
just	waiting	their	chance.
‘Majesty	.	.	.’	A	young	soldier,	broad	face	beaded	with	sweat,	was	at	Babur’s	elbow.	He	sounded	as	if
he	had	been	running	hard.
‘What	is	it?’
‘The	main	body	of	Uzbeks	are	fleeing	the	city	northwards	through	the	Shaykhzada	Gate	in	the	hope	of
re-joining	 Shaibani	 Khan	 –	 our	 archers	 are	 firing	 at	 them	 as	 they	 go.	 However,	 the	 local	 people	 have

trapped	some	in	the	gatehouse	of	the	Iron	Gate.’
‘Excellent.	We	must	clear	the	city	of	the	last	of	our	enemies	and	man	the	walls	before	Shaibani	Khan
can	 return.’	 Babur	 called	 for	 his	 horse	 and,	 bodyguard	 behind	 him,	 set	 out	 towards	 the	 Iron	 Gate.	 The
fabulous	blue	dome	of	Timur’s	mosque	caught	the	light,	but	beyond	it	smoke	was	rising	and	Babur	heard
screams.	 As	 he	 approached	 the	 Iron	 Gate	 he	 saw	 that	 flames	 were	 pushing	 through	 the	 roof	 of	 the
gatehouse	and	that	the	screams	were	coming	from	Uzbeks	trapped	inside.	Drawing	nearer,	he	saw	a	man
try	to	escape	by	climbing	through	a	window	only	to	be	pushed	back	into	the	flames	by	some	citizens	of
Samarkand,	 who	 immediately	 closed	 the	 shutters	 and	 barred	 them	 from	 the	 outside.	 Another	 Uzbek,	 his
clothes	 on	 fire,	 plunged	 from	 the	 top	 floor	 and	 crashed	 to	 the	 ground	 where	 the	 crowd	 immediately
surrounded	his	body,	stabbing	frenziedly	at	him	to	ensure	he	was	dead.	Soon	the	cheering	people	were
flourishing	his	bloody	head	as	a	trophy.
At	 Babur’s	 arrival,	 one	 of	 the	 citizens	 –	 his	 face	 smoke-blackened	 –	 rushed	 towards	 him	 and,
recognising	the	royal	standard	of	Ferghana	held	by	one	of	Babur’s	guards,	fell	to	his	knees.	‘Majesty,	we
have	 trapped	 them	 and	 are	 burning	 them.	 They	 are	 suffering	 like	 they	 made	 us	 suffer.	 None	 will	 die	 an
easy	 death,	 I	 promise.’	 His	 shining	 eyes	 contained	 only	 blood-lust	 as	 he	 looked	 to	 Babur	 for
congratulation,	but	the	sweet	stench	of	burning	flesh	sickened	Babur	and	he	simply	nodded	and	waved	the
man	away.
He	 turned	 his	 back	 on	 the	 flaming	 gatehouse	 where,	 already,	 the	 agonised	 cries	 of	 the	 Uzbeks	 were
growing	less	frequent	and	rode	back	slowly	towards	the	Registan	Square.	Samarkand,	it	seemed,	was	his
again	but	he	could	scarcely	believe	how	quickly	and	easily	it	had	fallen.
There	 was	 a	 clattering	 of	 hoofs	 ahead	 and	 a	 familiar	 figure	 came	 into	 view.	 It	 was	 Baisanghar,	 and
among	the	riders	accompanying	him,	he	glimpsed	Baburi.
‘Hail,	Babur,	King	of	Samarkand!’	Baisanghar	shouted,	and	behind	him	the	other	men	took	up	the	cry.
Babur	raised	a	hand	and	rode	slowly	past,	still	coming	to	terms	with	what	had	happened.	He	should	be
ecstatic,	but	instead	he	felt	a	strange	detachment.	Suddenly,	more	than	anything,	he	wanted	space	and	time
to	think.

That	night	in	the	Kok	Saray,	Babur	ordered	pen	and	paper	to	be	brought	to	him.	When	his	servant	asked
whether	he	also	wished	for	a	scribe,	he	shook	his	head.	He	had	decided	something.	He	was	nineteen,	a
fully	grown	man,	and	he	had	achieved	momentous	things.	From	now	on	he	would	keep	a	diary	in	which	he
would	speak	from	the	heart.	He	alone	would	know	what	was	written	there.
He	dipped	his	pen	into	the	ink,	thought	for	a	moment	then	began	to	write:	slowly	at	first	but	then	more
fluidly	as	his	emotions	welled	up	inside	him:
For	 generations	 Samarkand	 belonged	 to	 the	 House	 of	 Timur.	 Then	 the	 Uzbeks	 –	 the	 alien	 foe	 from
outside	 our	 civilised	 world	 on	 the	 fringes	 of	 mankind	 –	 seized	 and	 ravaged	 it.	 Now	 the	 city	 that
slipped	from	our	hands	has	by	God’s	grace	been	given	back.	Golden	Samarkand	is	mine	again.
With	a	deep	sigh,	he	put	down	his	pen	and	snuffed	out	his	candle.	He	lay	down	and,	moments	later,	was
asleep.

	
	
	

Chapter	11
Bitter	Almonds
	

The	first	frosts	had	made	the	delicate	outlines	of	Samarkand’s	egg-shaped	domes,	slender	minarets	and
tiled	gateways	look	as	if	they	had	been	covered	with	silver	leaf.	Now,	as	bitter	winds	howled	through	the
leafless	orchards	and	the	snow	tumbled	in	earnest,	the	city	seemed	to	Babur	like	a	bride	beneath	her	veils
–	her	grace	shrouded	from	the	eyes	of	men	but	not	entirely	concealed.
His	favourite	chestnut	horse	was	snorting	clouds	of	misty	breath	and	lifting	its	hoofs	high	out	of	the	soft
snow.	Wolfskin	cap	on	his	head,	fur-lined	robes	wrapped	tightly	round	him,	and	feet	in	sheepskin	boots,
Babur	was	returning	from	his	inspection	around	the	exterior	of	the	city	walls.	His	bodyguards	were	close
behind	him.	Wazir	Khan,	ill	these	past	two	weeks	with	a	fever,	was,	for	once,	not	with	him,	but	Baburi
was,	his	face	protected	from	the	scouring	cold	by	a	swathe	of	brilliant	green	cloth.
It	 was	 too	 cold	 to	 talk,	 even	 if	 they	 could	 have	 heard	 each	 other’s	 words	 through	 the	 wind	 and	 the
scarves	that	muffled	their	heads.	Babur’s	lips	were	so	numb	he	would	have	struggled	to	utter	a	word	but
as	 they	 rode	 towards	 the	 Turquoise	 Gate,	 hung	 with	 icicles,	 he	 forgot	 how	 chilled	 he	 was.	 The
exhilaration	of	success	pumped	an	inner	warmth	through	him,	like	a	draught	of	strong	spirit.
Yet	as	he	and	his	men	trotted	in	through	the	gateway	and	headed	westward	towards	the	citadel,	he	felt
the	stirrings	of	an	anxiety	that	had	seldom	left	him	during	the	three	months	since	he’d	taken	Samarkand.
For	the	present,	winter’s	frozen	grip	offered	protection	against	attack,	but	what	would	happen	when	the
snows	melted?	Although	Shaibani	Khan	had	not	immediately	laid	siege	to	the	city,	preferring	to	return	to
his	northern	fortresses	to	overwinter,	he	would	surely	not	just	accept	the	loss	of	Samarkand,	and	Babur
had	 known	 from	 the	 outset	 that,	 given	 his	 limited	 resources,	 it	 might	 be	 harder	 to	 hold	 the	 city	 against
Shaibani	Khan	than	to	take	it	from	him.	Immediately	after	its	capture,	he	had	set	his	men	to	strengthen	the
fortifications	 by	 building	 extra	 watch-towers	 and	 raising	 the	 wall	 itself	 in	 places	 until	 the	 frost	 had
virtually	ended	their	work.
Riding	into	the	courtyard	of	the	Kok	Saray,	Babur	wondered	whether	to	go	and	see	his	grandmother,
mother	and	sister	in	the	luxurious	apartments	they’d	occupied	since	arriving	in	Samarkand	soon	after	his
victory.	Instead	he	decided	to	visit	Wazir	Khan.	He	must	be	improving	by	now	.	.	.	Jumping	down	from	his
horse	 and	 slapping	 his	 hands	 against	 his	 sides	 to	 warm	 himself,	 he	 strode	 to	 the	 low,	 stone-built	 house
where	Wazir	Khan	lodged.	He	missed	him	and	was	impatient	for	his	recovery.
Stamping	the	snow	from	his	boots	and	pulling	off	his	cap	–	the	long	hairs	of	the	wolfskin	spiky	with	ice
–	 Babur	 went	 inside.	 On	 ducking	 through	 the	 low	 doorway	 into	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 chamber,	 he	 saw	 his	 old
friend	 lying	 on	 his	 back	 in	 his	 bed,	 an	 arm	 flung	 across	 his	 face	 as	 if	 asleep.	 Coming	 nearer,	 he	 was
shocked	by	how	violently	Wazir	Khan	was	shaking	despite	the	goatskin	coverlets	the	hakim	had	piled	on
him	and	the	fire	in	the	hearth.	Yesterday	he	had	been	shivering	only	a	little.
‘How	is	he?’
The	 hakim	 was	 stirring	 some	 concoction	 in	 a	 copper	 pot	 over	 the	 fire.	 ‘He	 is	 worse,	 Majesty.	 I	 am
brewing	an	elixir	of	wine,	herbs	and	cinnamon	to	try	to	drive	the	fever	from	him.’	The	man’s	tone	was
sombre,	his	face	preoccupied	–	very	different	from	his	respectful	jollity	at	their	previous	meetings.

A	knot	tightened	in	Babur’s	stomach	as,	for	the	first	time,	he	considered	the	possibility	that	Wazir	Khan
might	die.	‘You	must	save	him.’
‘I	will	try,	Majesty,	but	decisions	about	life	and	death	are	for	God	alone.	All	I	know	is	that	if	he	does
not	improve	soon,	he	will	be	beyond	any	powers	I	have	.	.	.’	The	hakim	turned	back	to	his	pot	and	began
stirring	vigorously	again.
Babur	went	to	Wazir	Khan	and	gently	moved	his	arm	from	his	face,	which	was	covered	with	a	film	of
sweat.	Wazir	Khan	stirred	and,	for	a	moment,	his	one	eye	opened.	‘Majesty	.	.	.’	His	usually	strong,	deep
voice	was	a	thin,	painful	croak.
‘Don’t	 try	 to	 speak.	 You	 must	 save	 your	 strength.’	 Carefully,	 Babur	 took	 hold	 of	 Wazir	 Khan’s
shoulders,	trying	to	still	the	shaking,	willing	some	of	his	own	strength	to	flow	into	his	sick	friend.	Through
the	thick	fabric	of	his	robe,	he	could	feel	the	hectic	heat	of	Wazir	Khan’s	body.
The	hakim	approached	with	a	clay	cup.
‘Let	me.’	Babur	took	the	cup	and	raising	Wazir	Khan’s	head	with	one	hand,	held	it	to	his	lips	with	the
other.	 Wazir	 Khan	 tried	 to	 drink,	 but	 the	 warm	 red	 liquid	 ran	 down	 his	 stubbly	 chin.	 Cursing	 his	 own
clumsiness,	Babur	tried	again,	recalling	how,	in	the	dank	cave,	Wazir	Khan	had	once	nursed	him	through	a
fever,	painstakingly	and	devotedly	trickling	drops	of	water	down	a	strip	of	cloth	into	his	dry	mouth.	He
raised	Wazir	Khan’s	head	higher	–	that	was	better.	Wazir	Khan	managed	to	swallow	a	little	of	the	hakim’s
brew,	then	a	little	more.	When	he	had	finished,	Babur	laid	his	head	back	on	the	pillow.
‘I	will	send	word	if	there	is	any	change	in	his	condition,	Majesty.’
‘I	will	stay.’	Wazir	Khan	had	no	one	closer	to	watch	over	him.	It	was	many	years	since	the	smallpox
had	taken	his	wife	and	son,	and	nearly	a	decade	since	his	daughter	had	died	in	childbirth.	Babur	gathered
up	a	couple	of	brocade	bolsters,	shoved	them	against	the	wall	next	to	Wazir	Khan’s	bed	and	flung	himself
down	on	them.	If	these	were	to	be	Wazir	Khan’s	last	hours	on	earth,	he	would	be	with	him.
As	 night	 drew	 on,	 Babur	 watched,	 and	 sometimes	 helped,	 as	 the	 hakim	 hovered	 around	 the	 bed,
checking	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 pulse,	 rolling	 back	 an	 eyelid	 to	 peer	 into	 his	 eye	 and	 placing	 a	 hand	 on	 his
forehead	to	gauge	his	temperature.	Sometimes	Wazir	Khan	lay	quietly,	though	still	shaking	and	shuddering.
At	other	times,	he	would	shout	out.	Most	of	his	words	were	incomprehensible	but	Babur	caught	something
among	the	ramblings	.	.	.
‘Doves	.	.	.	doves	with	ruby-red	blood	on	their	feathers	.	.	.	See	how	they	fall,	Majesty	.	.	.’
He	 must	 be	 re-living	 that	 day	 on	 the	 battlements	 of	 Akhsi	 when	 Babur’s	 father	 and	 his	 dovecote	 had
tumbled	 to	 oblivion.	 After	 all	 this	 time	 Babur	 could	 still	 feel	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 iron-strong	 hands	 dragging
him	back	from	the	edge	of	the	ravine	where	his	father’s	broken	body	had	lain	.	.	.	He	owed	so	much	to
Wazir	Khan,	who	had	been	as	a	father	to	him	since	that	time,	yet	there	was	nothing	he	could	do	to	save
him.
As	Wazir	Khan	fell	silent	again,	Babur	shut	his	eyes.	How	would	he	manage	without	him?

‘Majesty	.	.	.	Majesty	.	.	.	Wake	up!’
Babur	sat	up	with	a	start.	The	room	was	in	almost	total	darkness	except	for	a	flicker	of	light	from	an	oil
lamp	the	hakim	was	holding	high	in	his	right	hand.
Blinking,	Babur	stumbled	to	his	feet.	He	didn’t	want	to	look	at	the	bed	because	of	what	he	might	see.
Instead	he	fixed	his	eyes	on	the	hakim’s	face.	‘What	is	it?’
‘God	has	spoken,	Majesty.’	The	doctor	moved	over	to	the	bed	and	allowed	the	small	halo	of	light	from

his	lamp	to	fall	on	Wazir	Khan.
He	was	sitting	up	against	the	pillows.	He	was	no	longer	shivering,	his	one	eye	was	bright	and	clear	and
there	was	a	half-smile	on	his	wasted	face.	The	fever	had	gone.	For	a	moment	Babur	couldn’t	take	in	what
he	 was	 seeing,	 but	 then	 he	 rushed	 to	 the	 bed	 and	 threw	 his	 arms	 round	 Wazir	 Khan	 in	 a	 gesture	 of
overwhelming	relief	and	affection.
‘Majesty,	please,	my	patient	is	weak	.	.	.’	the	hakim	protested	but	Babur	barely	heard	him,	conscious
only	of	the	profoundest	gratitude.	Wazir	Khan	had	been	spared	.	.	.
Leaving	him	to	rest,	Babur	went	outside.	The	cold	air	stung	his	bare	face	but	he	didn’t	care.	Released
from	the	sickroom,	worries	over,	he	felt	his	own	youth	and	strength	surge	up	inside	him	and,	with	it,	the
need	 for	 young,	 carefree	 company.	 Though	 dawn	 was	 still	 only	 a	 pale	 sliver	 on	 the	 eastern	 horizon,	 he
asked	for	Baburi.
A	few	minutes	later	he	appeared,	bleary-eyed	and	fastening	his	sheepskin	jerkin.	Babur	could	see	his
warm	breath	rising	in	white	spirals	as	he	looked	around	him,	clearly	puzzled	to	have	been	summoned	so
early.	‘Come	on	–	we’re	going	for	a	ride,’	Babur	called	to	him.
‘What?	.	.	.’
‘You	heard	me	–	get	a	move	on	.	.	.’
Ten	 minutes	 later,	 they	 were	 galloping	 out	 of	 the	 Turquoise	 Gate,	 the	 hoofprints	 of	 their	 horses
pockmarking	the	fresh	snow	as	sunlight	began	to	warm	the	landscape.	It	was	good	to	be	young	and	alive,
whatever	was	to	come.

At	first	it	was	hard	to	be	certain.	At	this	time	of	the	year,	the	pale,	almost	colourless	light	played	tricks	on
men’s	eyes.	Babur	stared	hard	towards	Qolba	Hill.	As	he	watched,	he	thought	he	saw	more	of	them	–	yes:
he	was	right	–	the	distant	black	shapes	of	horsemen.
Wazir	Khan	was	also	gazing	fixedly	at	the	hill.
‘Uzbeks	.	.	.	?’
‘I	fear	so,	Majesty.	Probably	scouts.’
Babur	 turned	 away.	 Over	 the	 past	 three	 weeks	 rumours	 –	 at	 first	 vague	 and	 insubstantial,	 then	 more
detailed	–	had	begun	reaching	Samarkand.	The	two	facts	on	which	all	seemed	agreed	were	that	Shaibani
Khan	was	in	Bokhara,	to	the	west	of	Samarkand,	recruiting	mercenaries,	and	that	he	was	summoning	those
Uzbek	fighters	who	had	wintered	with	their	clans	and	promising	them	a	rich	prize.
On	 Babur’s	 orders	 the	 armourers	 of	 Samarkand,	 who	 had	 laboured	 hard	 through	 the	 winter,	 had
redoubled	their	efforts	and	were	working	night	and	day,	the	sound	of	clashing	metal	filling	the	air	as	they
forged	sharp-edged	blades	and	spears	in	their	furnaces	and	tempered	them	on	their	anvils.	He	would	have
enough	weapons	and	he	had	done	what	he	could	to	improve	the	fortifications,	but	what	about	men?
He	frowned.	At	the	last	count	he	had	seven	thousand,	including	the	Mangligh	crossbowmen	who	had
remained	in	the	city	through	the	winter.	Since	he	had	learned	that	the	Uzbeks	might	be	on	the	move,	he	had
despatched	 messengers	 to	 other	 chieftains	 in	 the	 region	 –	 even	 to	 Jahangir	 and	 Tambal	 in	 Akhsi	 whose
troops	had	returned	after	Babur	had	taken	Samarkand	–	asking	their	help	against	the	common	enemy.	So
far	none	had	answered.
‘I’m	not	surprised	the	Uzbeks	are	coming,	Wazir	Khan.	I	knew	it	was	only	a	matter	of	time.	While	you
were	ill,	Baburi	and	I	sometimes	talked	about	it	.	.	.’
‘And	what	did	the	market	boy	say?’

The	unaccustomed	sharpness	in	Wazir	Khan’s	tone	startled	Babur.	‘Market	boy	he	may	have	been,	but
he	still	talks	sense	.	.	.	and	he	knows	Samarkand	and	its	people	.	.	.’
‘He	should	remember	who	he	is	and	you	should	remember	who	you	are,	Majesty	.	.	.	You	are	the	king
.	.	.	It	doesn’t	look	good	to	be	seen	to	consult	an	upstart	like	him	rather	than	older,	wiser	and	better-born
men	.	.	.	I’m	only	saying	what	your	father	would,	if	God	had	spared	him	.	.	.’
Babur	glared	at	Wazir	Khan.	Perhaps	his	grandmother	had	been	getting	at	him	–	Esan	Dawlat	never	hid
her	contempt	for	Baburi	or	her	disapproval	of	Babur’s	association	with	him.	Then	he	remembered	how
much	he	owed	Wazir	Khan	and	how	ill	he	had	recently	been.	‘I	will	never	forget	I	am	king	and	of	Timur’s
blood.	I	enjoy	Baburi’s	company	.	.	.	but	I	ask	his	advice	because	it	is	sound.	Like	you,	he	doesn’t	tell	me
what	he	believes	I	wish	to	hear	–	but	says	what	is	in	his	mind.	That	doesn’t	mean	I	always	agree	with	him
.	.	.	I	take	my	own	decisions	.	.	.’
‘As	your	oldest	adviser	I	had	to	say	something.	Baburi	may	be	shrewd,	but	he’s	pleased	with	himself
and	 hot-tempered,	 too.	 If	 you’re	 not	 careful,	 your	 friendship	 with	 him	 will	 make	 others	 who	 feel
overlooked	jealous	and	resentful	.	.	.	Sometimes,	I	confess,	even	I’ve	not	felt	immune	from	this	.	.	.’
Seeing	 how	 troubled	 Wazir	 Khan	 looked,	 Babur	 touched	 his	 shoulder	 gently.	 ‘You	 are	 my	 greatest
support,	valued	above	all	my	other	ichkis,	and	I	know	you	only	speak	for	my	own	good.	I	will	be	careful
.	.	.	Now,	summon	the	council.	They	need	to	know	what	we’ve	seen	on	the	hill	.	.	.’
As	Wazir	Khan	walked	quickly	away	despite	his	limp,	Babur	stared	towards	Qolba	Hill	again,	but	the
black	shapes	had	vanished.	Was	Wazir	Khan	right	to	warn	him	about	Baburi	or	was	it	just	that	Wazir	Khan
couldn’t	understand	his	need	for	company	of	his	own	age?	Events	had	already	shown	him	that	a	king’s	life
could	be	as	precarious	as	a	market	boy’s.	If	he	was	going	to	prosper	and	triumph,	as	Timur	had	done,	he
needed	help	wherever	he	could	find	it.	For	the	present,	survival	was	what	mattered	and	Baburi	knew	all
about	that	.	.	.
Babur	hurried	to	his	audience	chamber	where	he	saw	on	a	low	table	inlaid	with	shimmering	mother-ofpearl	 the	 plan	 of	 the	 regions	 around	 Samarkand	 he	 had	 ordered	 to	 be	 prepared.	 Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 his
counsellors	were	clustered	round	him.
‘There’s	 no	 point	 waiting	 meekly	 within	 the	 walls.	 With	 the	 men	 we	 have	 it	 won’t	 be	 easy	 to	 repel
Shaibani	Khan’s	attacks	or	to	withstand	a	long	siege.	We’ll	stand	a	far	better	chance	of	success	if	we	take
the	fight	to	him	in	the	early	spring	before	he	has	had	time	to	gather	all	his	forces.	Even	though	we’ll	still
be	outnumbered,	we	can	strike	fast	and	hard	when	he	least	expects	it.	If,	as	I	believe	he	will,	he	advances
against	 us	 direct	 from	 Bokhara,	 his	 swiftest	 route	 is	 along	 this	 river	 flowing	 eastwards	 towards
Samarkand.’	Babur	traced	the	almost	straight	path	with	the	tip	of	his	gold-hilted	dagger.	‘But	before	he
reaches	Samarkand,	he	will	need	to	rendezvous	with	his	other	troops	before	moving	against	us	in	force
.	.	.	This	will	be	our	moment	to	attack.’
His	counsellors	murmured	agreement	except	for	Baisanghar	who	was	looking	anxious.
‘What	is	it,	Baisanghar	.	.	.	?’
‘Shaibani	Khan	is	not	predictable.	That	is	one	of	the	few	things	we	have	learned	about	him	–	to	our
cost.	I	remember	how	his	barbarians	descended	out	of	nowhere	to	kill	your	uncle	and	massacre	our	men
.	.	.’
‘That	 is	 why	 I	 am	 sending	 spies	 to	 Bokhara.	 I	 won’t	 be	 lured	 out	 of	 Samarkand	 by	 tricks	 –	 as	 we
ourselves	 tempted	 Shaibani	 Khan.	 But	 as	 soon	 as	 I’ve	 proof	 that	 he	 is	 moving	 against	 us,	 I’ll	 lead	 our
troops	 westward	 and	 surprise	 him.	 If	 he	 does	 advance	 along	 the	 river,	 I	 propose	 we	 lie	 in	 wait	 here.’
Babur	drove	the	tip	of	his	dagger	into	the	map	at	a	place	three	days’	ride	from	Samarkand	where	the	river
narrowed	as	it	passed	through	low,	stony	hills.

Ten	days	later	Babur	was	riding	at	the	head	of	his	men	towards	the	very	place	he	had	described	at	the
council	 meeting.	 A	 week	 ago	 his	 scouts	 had	 confirmed	 that	 Shaibani	 Khan’s	 men	 were	 indeed	 on	 the
move,	 with	 great	 numbers	 of	 horsemen,	 heading	 for	 the	 river.	 Babur	 had	 ordered	 his	 armies	 out	 from
Samarkand,	leaving	a	garrison	of	just	sufficient	size	to	defend	it	if	it	came	under	surprise	attack.	He	and
his	troops	had	kept	themselves	at	a	distance	from	the	river	while	scouts	had	tracked	the	Uzbeks’	progress
towards	and	along	it.	That	morning	they	had	reported	that	the	Uzbeks	had	already	broken	camp	and,	if	they
kept	up	their	normal	pace,	they	would	reach	the	narrows	about	midday.
Babur	had	given	his	orders	to	Wazir	Khan,	Baisanghar	and	Ali	Gosht,	his	master-of-horse.	Babur	and
the	advance	guard,	galloping	fast	in	spearhead	formation,	would	slam	from	the	flank	into	the	centre	of	the
Uzbek	 line	 of	 march	 and	 punch	 through,	 slaughtering	 as	 many	 Uzbeks	 and	 causing	 as	 much	 chaos	 as
possible,	before	regrouping	and	attacking	again	from	the	other	side.	As	soon	as	they	had	seen	him	drive
through	the	Uzbeks,	his	main	forces	should	advance	swiftly	under	the	command	of	Wazir	Khan	to	attack
the	 front	 of	 the	 column	 while	 another	 detachment	 under	 Baisanghar	 swept	 round	 to	 encircle	 the	 Uzbek
rear.	Ali	Gosht	should	hold	the	small	remainder	of	the	troops	in	reserve.
Now	Babur	saw	before	him	the	low	ridge	that	overlooked	the	river.	Soon	his	chestnut	horse	was	at	its
top	and	with	the	men	of	his	advance	guard	around	him	he	looked	down	on	a	long,	wide	column	of	Uzbek
riders,	kicking	up	clouds	of	dust	along	the	riverbank,	seemingly	oblivious	to	his	presence.	This	was	his
moment.	He	ordered	the	charge	down	the	gentle	incline	towards	his	enemy,	about	twelve	hundred	yards
away.	Almost	as	soon	as	he	had	kicked	his	horse	forward	he	saw,	for	the	first	time,	an	Uzbek	riding	at	a
little	distance	from	the	main	column,	perhaps	as	a	lookout.	Simultaneously	the	man	saw	him	and	raised	a
trumpet,	sounding	a	warning	to	the	main	body	before	himself	galloping	for	its	protection.
On	hearing	the	trumpet,	the	Uzbek	column	slowed	and	the	riders	turned	their	horses	to	face	the	threat.
Some	 had	 time	 to	 grab	 their	 bows	 and	 unleash	 a	 shower	 of	 hissing	 arrows,	 and	 several	 of	 Babur’s
advance	guard	crashed	to	the	ground	before	they	could	reach	the	Uzbeks.	The	rest,	led	by	Babur,	hurtled
onwards,	 hitting	 the	 enemy	 column	 at	 full	 gallop	 and	 slashing	 around	 them.	 The	 Uzbek	 lines	 seemed	 to
buckle	and	waver	and	Babur	thought	victory	was	surely	his.
But	 then	 they	 began	 to	 enfold	 Babur’s	 men	 rather	 than	 to	 scatter	 before	 them.	 Babur	 saw	 his	 young
standard	bearer	tumble	from	his	horse	in	front	of	him,	his	head	pulped	by	one	blow	from	a	metal-studded
Uzbek	 flail.	 Pulling	 his	 horse’s	 head	 hard	 round,	 Babur	 avoided	 the	 youth’s	 body	 and	 succeeded	 in
skewering	 his	 killer	 with	 his	 spear	 but	 then	 more	 Uzbeks	 were	 hacking	 at	 him.	 Discarding	 his	 spear,
Babur	fought	back	with	Alamgir.	The	sheer	weight	and	numbers	of	the	Uzbek	onslaught	around	him	was
forcing	him	away	from	his	bodyguard	and	he	realised	he	was	all	but	surrounded.	If	he	were	not	to	die	he
had	to	break	through.	Extending	Alamgir	before	him	in	his	right	hand	and	bending	low	to	his	horse’s	neck,
he	made	for	the	only	gap	he	could	see	in	the	Uzbeks	around	him.
Moments	later,	he	was	in	open	ground,	gasping	for	breath.	Blood	was	trickling	into	his	right	eye	from	a
wound	in	his	temple.	An	Uzbek	warrior	had	nearly	succeeded	in	driving	a	spear	through	his	head.	Only
Babur’s	swift,	sideways	dodge	had	prevented	it	and	even	so	the	sharp	point	had	caught	him.	Attempting	to
brush	away	the	blood	and	with	his	vision	blurred,	he	tried	to	make	out	which	way	to	ride	to	get	back	to
his	main	force.
After	a	minute	or	so	his	vision	began	clearing	though	blood	was	still	oozing	from	his	wound.	Hastily
Babur	 cut	 a	 strip	 of	 cloth	 from	 his	 horse’s	 saddle	 blanket	 with	 his	 dagger	 and	 tied	 it	 round	 his	 head.
Peering	round,	he	realised	that	his	initial	attack	had	failed	and	that	his	terrified	horse	had	carried	him	off

at	a	tangent	into	a	no	man’s	land	between	the	Uzbeks	and	his	own	remaining	forces.	He	was	in	imminent
danger	 again.	 Kicking	 his	 chestnut,	 he	 galloped	 quickly	 back	 towards	 his	 own	 lines,	 expecting	 at	 any
moment	to	feel	the	bite	of	an	arrow	or	a	spear.	It	did	not	come.
There	 was	 no	 time	 to	 discuss	 fresh	 tactics	 with	 his	 commanders	 when	 Babur	 regained	 his	 lines	 near
where	 Ali	 Gosht	 was	 sitting	 on	 his	 grey	 horse	 overlooking	 the	 action,	 holding	 his	 force	 in	 reserve	 as
ordered.	Even	as	he	reined	in	his	nearly	spent	mount,	Babur	heard	a	great	roar	and	a	clashing	of	swords
on	 shields	 behind	 him.	 A	 few	 seconds	 more	 and	 the	 Uzbeks	 would	 be	 on	 them.	 ‘I	 will	 take	 command
here,’	Babur	yelled	to	Ali	Gosht.	‘Send	riders	along	the	lines	to	Wazir	Khan	and	Baisanghar.	They	are	to
forget	 all	 previous	 orders.	 As	 soon	 as	 the	 Uzbeks	 are	 in	 range	 our	 archers	 are	 to	 fire.	 Then,	 at	 my
command,	our	entire	force	will	charge.’
Sword	raised,	Babur	turned	his	sweat-streaked	horse	to	face	the	Uzbeks,	who	had,	in	fact,	slowed	and
were	now	advancing	at	a	canter.	In	their	centre,	between	two	tall	purple	standards,	he	made	out	a	rider
who	 could	 only	 be	 Shaibani	 Khan.	 He	 was	 too	 far	 away	 for	 Babur	 to	 see	 his	 features	 but	 there	 was
something	in	his	arrogant	bearing,	his	stillness,	that	drew	the	eye,	just	as	it	had	when	he	had	led	the	sortie
out	of	Samarkand	six	months	previously.	As	Babur	watched,	Shaibani	Khan	slowly	raised	his	left	hand	as
if	in	salutation	and	the	war-cry	of	his	warriors	rose	with	it	–	a	sound	to	chill	the	blood.
Babur’s	men	yelled	their	own	defiance,	but	they	had	barely	filled	their	lungs	when,	with	a	wave	of	his
sword,	Shaibani	Khan	signalled	the	attack	and	the	thunder	of	Uzbek	hoofs	drowned	all	other	sounds	as
they	accelerated	into	a	gallop.	Around	him,	Babur’s	men	struggled	to	hold	their	horses	in	check	with	one
hand	while	with	the	other	they	held	up	their	shields	against	the	volleys	of	arrows	falling	from	the	skies.
Babur’s	archers	were	firing	back	and	many	of	their	missiles	were	finding	their	mark,	but	the	dark,	fastapproaching	 wave	 of	 Uzbeks	 did	 not	 falter	 even	 when	 riders	 slipped	 from	 the	 saddle	 to	 be	 crushed
beneath	the	hoofs	of	those	galloping	behind.
The	 Uzbeks	 were	 close	 enough	 now.	 ‘For	 Samarkand!’	 Babur	 yelled,	 and	 charged,	 followed	 by	 his
men.	 Seconds	 later,	 the	 two	 lines	 crashed	 into	 each	 other.	 The	 shouts	 and	 screams	 of	 men	 and	 the
whinnying	of	horses	mingled	with	the	clash	of	metal.	It	was	hard	–	in	fact,	impossible	in	the	press	and
confusion	of	battle	–	to	tell	what	was	happening,	but	it	seemed	to	Babur	as	he	cut	and	slashed	that	his	men
were	gaining	ground.	Energy	flowed	through	him	as	he	lunged	at	a	tall,	mail-clad	Uzbek	who,	instead	of
trying	 to	 fight	 him,	 backed	 his	 rearing	 horse	 away.	 The	 Uzbeks	 easily	 outnumbered	 his	 forces	 but	 all
round,	 they	 seemed	 to	 be	 giving	 ground,	 wheeling	 off	 to	 left	 and	 right	 as	 Babur	 and	 his	 men	 pushed
determinedly	forward.
But	 he	 needed	 to	 see	 what	 was	 happening.	 Spurring	 his	 horse,	 Babur	 shot	 through	 a	 gap	 that	 had
suddenly	opened	ahead	of	him.	Yelling	to	those	men	who	were	still	by	his	side	to	follow,	he	made	for	a
low,	 scrub-covered	 hillock,	 which	 –	 so	 far	 as	 he	 could	 see	 –	 was	 unoccupied	 and	 would	 be	 a	 good
vantage-point.	There,	he	looked	down	on	the	battle.	A	pattern	began	to	emerge	from	among	the	wheeling,
fighting	riders.	Suddenly	everything	was	obvious,	and	Babur	swore	in	anguish.	He	knew	what	the	Uzbeks
were	about.	It	was	the	ancient	Mongol	tactic	of	the	tulughma.	He	had	read	of	it	but	never	witnessed	it	till
now.
As	 they	 seemed	 to	 part	 before	 the	 onslaught	 of	 Babur’s	 men,	 Shaibani	 Khan’s	 troops	 were	 in	 fact
forming	into	two	units,	one	on	the	right,	one	on	the	left.	In	a	moment	they	would	sweep	round	to	cut	off
Babur’s	right	and	left	wings,	leaving	the	centre	of	his	lines	isolated	and	unprotected.	Uzbeks	would	then
detach	from	the	two	units	to	encircle	and	smash	the	centre.	Afterwards	they	would	re-join	their	comrades
to	share	in	the	destruction	of	Babur’s	left	and	right	wings.	The	men	under	Wazir	Khan	would	be	funnelled
towards	 the	 river	 and	 trapped	 on	 its	 steep,	 sandy	 banks	 while	 Baisanghar’s	 men	 would	 be	 completely
surrounded	unless	they	could	break	out	quickly.

The	harsh	blasts	of	a	horn	from	somewhere	behind	Babur	rose	above	the	sounds	of	battle.	A	formation
of	Uzbek	warriors	was	galloping	from	behind	a	hill	some	quarter	of	a	mile	away	where	they	must	have
been	waiting,	concealed.	As	they	came	nearer,	their	black	hide	shields	with	silver	bosses	told	Babur	who
they	were:	Shaibani’s	crack	troops,	warriors	of	his	own	clan,	blood	of	his	blood.	They	were	heading	for
Baisanghar’s	men,	no	doubt	intending	to	block	off	their	last	chance	of	retreat.
Suddenly	Babur	realised	that	Baisanghar	wouldn’t	be	able	to	see	them	because	of	a	fold	in	the	land.
But	he	himself	was	closer	to	Baisanghar	than	the	riders.	Swiftly	he	picked	one	of	his	men	whose	horse
still	looked	fresh.	‘Warn	Baisanghar	–	tell	him	to	get	his	men	away	and	retreat	towards	Samarkand	as	best
he	 can.	 Do	 you	 understand?’	 The	 youth	 galloped	 away	 down	 the	 hillock.	 Babur	 waited	 until	 it	 seemed
certain	his	messenger	would	beat	the	swooping	line	of	Uzbeks,	then,	yelling	to	the	others	to	keep	close,	he
charged	towards	the	riverbank	where	Wazir	Khan’s	men	were	fighting	for	their	lives.
Circling	round	to	where	the	lines	of	attacking	Uzbeks	looked	thinnest,	Babur	managed	to	hack	his	way
through,	but	of	the	twenty	or	so	men	who	had	ridden	with	him,	only	a	dozen	made	it.	The	situation	seemed
hopeless.	 Wazir	 Khan’s	 men	 were	 indeed	 being	 pushed	 right	 back	 to	 the	 river	 by	 Uzbeks,	 some
continuously	 firing	 arrows	 from	 the	 saddle	 while	 others,	 wielding	 curved	 swords,	 plunged	 into	 the
disorganised	and	heaving	mass	of	men	and	horses	struggling	to	stay	upright	as	the	sandy	banks	gave	way
under	them.	Babur	couldn’t	pick	out	Wazir	Khan.
Suddenly,	Babur	felt	his	horse	shudder	beneath	him.	With	a	scream	of	pain,	the	beautiful	chestnut,	hit
almost	simultaneously	in	its	neck	and	throat	by	two	arrows	and	already	twitching	in	its	death	throes	as
scarlet	blood	pumped	from	a	severed	artery,	went	crashing	to	the	ground.	Babur	jumped	clear,	only	just
avoiding	being	pinned	to	the	earth	by	the	thrashing	animal.	As	he	scrambled	unsteadily	to	his	feet,	he	still
had	his	sword,	Alamgir,	in	his	hand	but	had	lost	his	dagger	and	shield.	Disoriented	and	dodging	flailing
hoofs	and	slashing	blades,	he	looked	around	for	another	horse.
‘Majesty.’	It	was	Baburi,	his	face	blood-encrusted,	eyes	desperate.	Leaning	forward	in	the	saddle,	he
pulled	Babur	up	behind	him	on	his	grey	horse.
‘	 To	 the	 river!’	 Babur	 shouted.	 Their	 only	 hope	 was	 to	 get	 away	 with	 as	 many	 men	 as	 possible	 and
leave	 the	 fight	 for	 another	 day.	 Waving	 his	 sword	 above	 his	 head,	 he	 looked	 round	 for	 his	 other
commanders,	yelling	to	them	to	get	their	men	over	the	river.	He	still	couldn’t	see	Wazir	Khan.
The	river	was	in	full	spate	with	the	meltwater	from	the	mountain	snows.	It	was	freezing	as	they	plunged
in	and	the	currents	were	strong.	Baburi’s	horse	struggled	beneath	their	double	weight	as	it	tried	to	swim.
It	would	never	make	it	with	two	of	them.	Thrusting	Alamgir	into	its	scabbard,	Babur	slid	off,	avoiding
Baburi’s	attempt	to	keep	him	aboard.	But	as	he	struck	out	for	the	opposite	bank,	no	more	than	twenty	yards
away,	the	powerful	current	grabbed	him	and	carried	him	downstream.
‘Majesty	.	.	.’	Babur	recognised	Wazir	Khan’s	voice,	but	with	cold	water	flowing	about	his	ears	and
threatening	to	suck	him	under,	he	was	in	no	position	to	look	round.	Then	he	felt	something	thin	and	hard
knock	against	him	in	the	water.	Instinctively	he	grabbed	it.	It	felt	like	the	shaft	of	a	spear.	As	the	current
whirled	him	against	an	outcrop	of	sharp	rocks	on	the	far	side	of	the	river,	he	jammed	the	end	of	the	shaft
into	a	narrow	crevice.	It	bowed	but	held.	Kicking	hard	against	the	current,	Babur	hauled	himself	along	it
to	reach	the	rocks	and	with	scratched	and	bloodied	hands	heaved	himself,	gasping,	out	of	the	water.
Arrows	were	falling	all	around	him.	Across	the	river,	Uzbek	archers	lined	the	banks,	jeering	at	their
retreating	opponents,	some	even	finding	time	between	shots	to	gesture	obscenely.	As	he	dodged	behind	a
rock	 for	 cover,	 Babur	 saw	 Wazir	 Khan.	 He	 was	 still	 in	 the	 water.	 His	 black	 horse	 had	 been	 hit	 in	 the
flanks	and	rump	by	several	arrows	and	its	eyes	were	rolling	in	terror	and	pain.	Wazir	Khan	was	urging	it
on	but	was	still	only	halfway	across.	Had	he	tossed	Babur	the	spear	that	had	saved	him?	Forgetting	his
own	danger,	Babur	rose	from	behind	his	rock	and	yelled	Wazir	Khan’s	name.	The	old	soldier	looked	up.

Then	 Babur	 saw	 an	 archer	 on	 the	 far	 bank	 take	 deliberate	 aim	 and	 draw	 back	 his	 bow-string.	 The
black-feathered	 arrow	 swooped	 through	 the	 air	 like	 a	 hawk	 on	 its	 prey.	 For	 some	 reason,	 Wazir	 Khan
turned	and,	as	he	did	so,	the	arrow	embedded	itself	in	his	exposed	throat	with	such	force	that	the	tip	came
through	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck.	 Slowly,	 he	 slid	 sideways	 from	 his	 horse	 into	 the	 roaring,	 swift-flowing
waters.	Babur’s	desperate,	despairing	shouts	pursued	him	as	the	blood-flecked	river	bore	his	body	away.
Babur	felt	as	dazed	as	he	had	on	the	day	when	he	had	seen	his	father	fall	from	the	walls	of	Akhsi.	He
sank	to	the	ground	and	closed	his	eyes.
‘Majesty,	we	must	get	away	.	.	.’	It	was	Baburi’s	voice.	When	Babur	didn’t	respond,	Baburi	shook	him,
then	yanked	him	roughly	to	his	feet.	‘Come	on	.	.	.	don’t	be	an	idiot	.	.	.’
‘Wazir	Khan	.	.	.	I	must	send	a	search-party	downstream	.	.	.	He	may	be	washed	up	alive.’
‘He	is	dead	.	.	.	Let	the	dead	care	for	themselves.	You	can’t	do	anything	for	him	except	save	yourself
.	.	.	That’s	what	he	would	have	wanted.	You	know	that	.	.	.	Come	on	.	.	.’

‘The	granaries	are	almost	empty,	Majesty.’	Babur’s	vizier,	Kasim,	meticulous	as	ever,	was	consulting	the
red	 leatherbound	 book	 in	 which,	 since	 the	 siege	 had	 begun,	 he	 had	 recorded	 the	 state	 of	 Samarkand’s
provisions.
‘How	many	days’	supplies	are	left?’
‘Five	days’	worth.	A	week	at	most.’
There	was	no	point	cutting	the	ration	again.	Even	now	it	was	only	three	cups	of	grain	for	soldiers,	two
for	male	civilians	and	one	for	each	woman	and	child.	The	people	were	already	devouring	anything	they
could	find,	from	crows	they	shot	with	catapults	to	the	carcasses	of	asses	and	dogs	that	had	died	of	hunger
or	been	killed	for	their	meat.	In	the	royal	stables,	all	pack	animals	had	long	since	been	slaughtered	for
meat	for	the	garrison.	His	men	were	already	feeding	their	precious	riding	mounts	on	leaves	from	the	trees
and	 sawdust	 soaked	 in	 water,	 and	 their	 condition	 was	 growing	 daily	 more	 wretched.	 Soon	 they	 would
have	 to	 start	 killing	 them.	 Once	 the	 horses	 were	 gone,	 they	 would	 not	 even	 be	 able	 to	 send	 out	 raiding
parties	to	run	the	Uzbek	blockade	around	the	city	walls	and	forage	for	provisions.
Every	day	for	the	past	three	months	Babur	had	wondered	whether	Shaibani	Khan	would	attack.	But	why
should	he?	He	must	know	it	was	only	a	matter	of	time	before	Babur	would	be	forced	to	surrender.	And	he
seemed	to	take	a	perverse	pleasure	in	the	city’s	suffering,	feasting	his	men	before	the	walls	and	burning
food	pillaged	from	the	surrounding	villages	before	the	besiegeds’	eyes	as	if	to	say,	‘I	have	so	much	I	can
waste	it	–	you,	however,	have	nothing.’
Worse,	three	weeks	ago	he	had	captured	six	deserters	from	Babur’s	forces	who	had	slipped	over	the
city	walls	and	had	ordered	them	to	be	boiled	alive	in	oil	in	great	copper	cauldrons	set	up	in	full	view	of
the	city	walls.	At	least	their	shrieks	had	put	paid	to	any	further	desertions.
Babur	 dismissed	 Kasim,	 descended	 to	 the	 courtyard	 and	 called	 for	 a	 horse	 and	 escort.	 The	 loss	 of
Wazir	Khan	still	hurt	–	he	missed	him	not	only	as	a	loyal	friend	but	as	a	wise	counsellor,	especially	in
these	bleak	times.	But	Baburi,	as	usual	these	days,	was	among	those	riding	with	him,	his	high	cheekbones
even	more	pronounced	through	hunger.	He	was	a	good	gauge	of	what	was	going	on	and	prepared	to	speak
frankly.
How	 different	 Samarkand	 seemed	 compared	 with	 those	 days	 of	 celebration	 when	 Babur,	 hung	 with
emeralds,	 had	 sat	 on	 the	 dais	 beneath	 silken	 awnings,	 to	 be	 hailed	 in	 the	 Registan	 Square.	 Even
Samarkand’s	fabulously	tiled	and	sparkling	buildings	seemed	diminished.

The	thoroughfare	Babur	was	riding	along	was	deep	with	stinking	refuse	that	no	one	had	the	energy	to
move	 unless	 to	 sift	 through	 it	 in	 the	 hope	 of	 finding	 something	 to	 eat.	 Baburi	 had	 reported	 that	 some
desperate	citizens	were	even	sieving	dung,	searching	for	seeds	to	cook.	Others	were	boiling	any	leaves	or
grasses	they	could	find.	Wherever	he	looked,	Babur	saw	pinched	faces	and	dull,	sunken	eyes.	Where	once
people	had	cheered	him,	now	they	turned	away.
‘Baburi,	what’s	in	their	minds?’
‘Little	but	how	to	appease	their	hunger,	but	those	few	times	they	do	think	of	anything	else,	it	is	to	fear
what	Shaibani	Khan	will	do	if	he	takes	the	city	which	they	think	is	near.	The	Uzbeks	killed	and	raped	and
destroyed	 last	 time	 when	 they	 had	 no	 cause.	 This	 time	 Shaibani	 Khan	 will	 recall	 how	 the	 citizens
welcomed	you,	how	they	fell	on	his	men,	and	he	will	want	revenge.’
‘I’m	going	to	Timur’s	tomb	.	.	.’	Babur	announced	suddenly.	Baburi	looked	surprised	but	said	nothing.
Riding	into	the	courtyard	before	the	entrance	gate	to	the	tomb,	Babur	jumped	down	from	his	horse	and
gestured	to	Baburi	to	accompany	him.	Waving	aside	the	tomb	attendants,	he	led	the	way	swiftly	across	the
inner	courtyard	and	down	to	the	crypt	where	Timur	lay.
Babur	pressed	his	hands	to	the	cold	stone.	‘This	is	where	Timur	lies.	When	I	first	came	to	this	place	I
promised	that	I	would	be	worthy	of	him.	The	moment	has	come	for	me	to	fulfil	that	pledge.	I’m	going	to
lead	out	my	men	in	one	last	stand	before	the	city	walls.	Future	generations	will	not	be	able	to	say	that	I
yielded	Timur’s	city	to	a	barbarian	without	a	fight	.	.	.’
‘It	will	be	a	better	death	than	waiting	till	we	are	so	weak	we	can	no	longer	grip	a	sword	.	.	.’
Babur	nodded	and,	as	he	had	once	before,	lowered	his	head	to	kiss	the	cold	coffin.
But	as	they	rode	back	towards	the	Kok	Saray,	Babur	sensed	a	change.	There	seemed	to	be	more	people
on	the	streets	and	they	were	talking	animatedly,	as	if	they	had	news	to	discuss.	Many	were	heading	in	the
same	direction	as	himself,	surging	about	him.	Soon	his	guards	had	to	form	a	barrier	around	him	and	push
the	people	back	with	the	shafts	of	their	spears	to	let	him	through.
One	of	his	soldiers	came	galloping	towards	him	at	full	tilt.	‘Majesty,’	he	shouted,	as	soon	as	he	was	in
earshot,	‘a	messenger	has	come	from	Shaibani	Khan.’
Ten	 minutes	 later	 Babur	 was	 back	 in	 the	 Kok	 Saray,	 hurrying	 into	 his	 audience	 chamber	 where	 his
counsellors	were	waiting.
The	Uzbek	ambassador	was	a	tall,	stout	man	in	a	black	turban	and	a	dark	purple	tunic.	A	battleaxe	was
slung	across	his	back,	a	scimitar	hung	at	his	side	and	a	silver-hilted	dagger	was	tucked	into	his	orange
sash.	He	touched	his	hand	to	his	breast	as	Babur	entered.
‘What	is	your	message?’
‘My	lord	offers	you	a	solution	to	your	predicament.’
‘And	what	is	it?’
‘He	is	prepared	to	forgive	your	theft	of	the	city.	If	you	will	 restore	 his	 rightful	 property	 to	 him,	 you,
your	family	and	your	troops	may	leave.	He	offers	you	safe	passage	back	to	Ferghana	or,	if	you	prefer,	to
the	west	or	south.	He	gives	you	his	word	on	the	Holy	Book	that	he	will	not	attack	you.’
‘And	what	of	the	city	and	its	people?	Will	he	make	more	drums	from	human	skin,	as	he	did	with	my
cousin,	Prince	Mahmud?’
‘My	lord	says	that	the	citizens	must	pay	for	their	insult	to	him	–	but	in	taxes	not	in	blood.	Again,	he
gives	you	his	word	on	the	Holy	Book.’
‘Are	there	any	conditions?’
‘None,	 except	 that	 you	 leave	 Samarkand	 before	 the	 next	 new	 moon,	 two	 weeks	 from	 now.’	 The
ambassador	folded	his	hands	on	his	ample	stomach.
‘Tell	Shaibani	Khan	I	will	consider	his	offer	and	send	my	reply	before	noon	tomorrow.’

‘And	in	the	meantime	I	have	brought	you	a	present	from	my	lord.’	The	ambassador	snapped	his	fingers
and	one	of	his	attendants,	who	had	been	standing	discreetly	to	one	side,	approached	with	a	large	basket.
Removing	 the	 conical	 lid,	 he	 tipped	 the	 contents	 on	 to	 the	 rugs	 beneath	 the	 dais	 –	 melons	 from	 the
orchards	outside	Samarkand,	honey-ripe	and	golden,	their	mouth-watering	fragrance	filling	the	chamber.
‘I	have	brought	two	mule	loads.	They	are	waiting	by	the	Turquoise	Gate.	My	lord	hopes	you	will	find	the
fruit	most	delicious.’
‘You	may	tell	your	master	we	have	no	need	of	such	things.	The	gardens	inside	Samarkand’s	walls	drip
with	ripe	fruit.	We	will	feed	these	to	our	mules	.	.	.’	Babur	rose,	and	as	he	swept	past	the	ambassador
made	sure	he	kicked	one	of	the	melons	aside.	It	rolled	across	the	chamber	and	hit	a	stone	door	frame,	so
that	its	golden	pulp	oozed	out.

‘Can	we	trust	him?’	Babur’s	eyes	searched	the	faces	of	his	counsellors	as,	that	night,	they	convened	in	the
candle-lit	audience	chamber.	He	had	needed	time	to	think	on	his	own	before	summoning	them.
‘He’s	a	barbarian	and	the	enemy	of	our	blood,	but	he	has	given	his	word,’	said	Baisanghar.
‘The	word	of	a	cattle	thief	.	.	.’	Babur	replied	grimly.
‘But	he’ll	lose	face	if	he	goes	back	on	a	promise	so	publicly	given	on	the	Holy	Book.’
‘But	 why	 has	 he	 made	 this	 offer?	 He	 vastly	 outnumbers	 us	 and	 knows	 the	 city	 is	 starving.	 Why	 not
wait?	Shaibani	Khan	doesn’t	lack	patience.’
‘I	think	I	may	know	the	answer,	Majesty.’	Baburi	stepped	forward	from	where	he	had	been	standing,	on
guard,	to	one	side	of	Babur’s	dais.
‘Speak.’	 Babur	 gestured	 to	 him	 to	 join	 the	 circle	 of	 men	 seated	 around	 him,	 ignoring	 the	 surprise	 of
some	that	their	king	had	invited	a	common	soldier	into	their	midst.
‘There	are	rumours	in	the	bazaars	–	from	those	who	spoke	to	the	ambassador’s	attendants	today	–	that
Shaibani	Khan	faces	a	challenge	from	within	the	Uzbek	clans.	They	say	that	a	nephew,	far	away	on	the
steppes,	is	raising	an	army	against	him.	Shaibani	Khan	wants	to	ride	north	and	smash	the	rebellion	before
it	grows.	If	he	doesn’t	go	soon,	the	weather	will	be	his	enemy	and	he	will	have	to	leave	it	unchecked	until
next	spring	.	.	.’
If	 that	 was	 true,	 Babur	 thought,	 Shaibani	 Khan	 had	 no	 time	 to	 waste	 on	 sieges.	 He	 would	 want	 to
reoccupy	the	city,	garrison	it	and	be	on	his	way.	It	probably	also	meant	he	would	keep	his	word	not	to
attack	 them.	 He	 would	 not	 want	 to	 expend	 men	 and	 resources	 –	 or	 risk	 stirring	 up	 the	 other	 Timurid
chieftains	and	rulers	of	the	region	–	by	harassing	Babur’s	retreating	forces.
‘I	have	decided.’	Babur	stood	up.	‘I	will	accept	the	Uzbek	terms	–	provided	that	our	men	are	allowed
to	 depart	 fully	 armed.’	 Then	 he	 added,	 with	 as	 much	 certainty	 as	 he	 could	 muster,	 ‘The	 people	 will	 be
saved	and,	inshallah	–	God	willing	–	we	shall	return.’
Next	morning,	Babur	watched	from	the	walls	of	the	Kok	Saray	as	Kasim,	his	ambassador,	accompanied
by	 two	 soldiers	 carrying	 the	 green	 standards	 of	 Samarkand,	 rode	 slowly	 through	 the	 Turquoise	 Gate
towards	Shaibani	Khan’s	camp.
Despite	 his	 fine	 words	 to	 his	 people,	 this	 was	 surrender	 –	 something	 he’d	 never	 done	 before,	 never
believed	 he	 would	 do.	 The	 knowledge	 sickened	 him.	 Yet	 he	 had	 known	 from	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
campaign	that	the	odds	were	stacked	against	him.	In	the	end	he	had	had	no	real	choice	other	than	to	agree
to	Shaibani	Khan’s	terms.	It	had	clearly	been	the	right	thing	to	do	for	the	sake	of	the	citizens	of	Samarkand
but	the	thought	of	retreat	–	of	ceding	the	city	to	a	hated	foe	–	left	a	bitter	taste	in	his	mouth,	like	almonds

left	too	long	on	the	tree.	Even	so,	this	way	he,	too,	would	be	free	and	have	the	opportunity	to	re-build	his
fortunes	and	those	of	his	family,	provided	he	retained	his	self-belief	and	determination	which	he	knew	he
would.	He	was	still	a	young	man	and	had	not	been	born	or	brought	up	to	fail	but	to	achieve	great	things.
He	would	fulfil	his	destiny.

Babur	mounted	his	horse	and,	without	a	backward	glance	at	the	tall	Kok	Saray,	rode	out.	His	bodyguard,
Baburi	 among	 them,	 was	 behind	 him	 and	 at	 the	 back,	 well	 protected	 by	 cavalrymen	 and	 screened	 by
leather	curtains,	his	mother,	sister	and	grandmother	were	with	their	attendants	in	a	bullock	cart.
His	wife	and	her	women	were	in	another	cart,	escorted	by	the	Mangligh	crossbowmen	who	would	now
return	to	Zaamin.	Ayisha	had	asked	Babur	whether	she	might	go	with	them	to	visit	her	father	and	he	had
agreed.	As	far	as	he	was	concerned,	it	was	the	only	bright	spot	in	one	of	the	darkest	moments	of	his	life.
The	 rest	 of	 Babur’s	 forces	 were	 already	 riding	 northwards	 through	 the	 city	 towards	 the	 Shaykhzada
Gate	 through	 which,	 Shaibani	 Khan	 had	 decreed,	 Babur	 must	 make	 his	 exit.	 In	 just	 a	 few	 hours’	 time,
Shaibani	 Khan	 himself,	 flanked	 by	 his	 dark-robed	 Uzbek	 warriors,	 would	 ride	 in	 through	 the	 glorious
Turquoise	Gate.
The	city	was	sullen	and	still.	The	windows	and	doors	of	the	houses	were	mostly	shuttered	and	barred
as	Babur	and	his	party	passed	by,	though	occasionally	a	citizen	would	stick	out	his	head	and	spit	audibly.
Babur	 didn’t	 blame	 them.	 He	 would	 have	 liked	 to	 declare	 that	 he	 would	 be	 back,	 that	 this	 was	 just	 a
temporary	 setback	 in	 what	 would	 be	 a	 golden	 future	 for	 Samarkand	 under	 a	 Timurid	 ruler,	 not	 a	 vile
Uzbek,	 but	 why	 should	 they	 believe	 him?	 However	 straight	 his	 back	 as	 he	 rode,	 however	 stern	 his
countenance,	 their	 eyes	 could	 not	 penetrate	 his	 body	 and	 see	 the	 steely	 determination	 in	 his	 heart	 to
succeed.
It	 was	 midday	 and	 the	 sun	 was	 beating	 down.	 They	 would	 not	 ride	 far	 today,	 Babur	 thought.	 They
would	circle	to	the	east	and	make	camp	on	the	far	side	of	Qolba	Hill.	At	least	from	there	he	would	not
have	 to	 gaze	 on	 Samarkand.	 Tomorrow	 he	 and	 his	 counsellors	 would	 consider	 where	 best	 to	 go.	 Esan
Dawlat	 was	 urging	 him	 to	 seek	 out	 her	 people	 far	 to	 the	 east	 beyond	 Ferghana.	 Perhaps	 she	 was	 right,
though	Babur’s	instincts	were	to	retreat	to	the	mountains	to	some	quiet	hideaway	not	so	far	away	and	bide
his	time	.	.	.
Ahead,	he	could	see	the	high	curved	arch	of	the	Shaykhzada	Gate.	As	he	approached,	Baisanghar	rode
towards	 him.	 He	 looked	 gaunt	 and	 drawn.	 Of	 course,	 this	 was	 his	 city	 –	 he	 had	 been	 born	 here:
surrendering	it	to	the	Uzbeks	must	hurt	him	deeply.	His	sense	of	loss	would	be	no	less	than	Babur’s.
‘The	men	are	drawn	up	in	the	meadows	beyond	the	gate,	Majesty,	but	there	is	more.	Shaibani	Khan’s
ambassador	requests	a	further	audience	of	you.’
‘Very	well.	Bring	him	before	me	once	I	have	re-joined	my	men.’
Babur’s	forces	–	no	more	than	two	thousand	now	–	were	a	wretched,	ragged	bunch	compared	to	the
army	 with	 which	 he	 had	 taken	 Samarkand.	 Death,	 wounds,	 desertions,	 starvation	 and	 the	 disease	 it	 had
brought	 in	 its	 wake,	 had	 taken	 their	 toll.	 And	 there	 were	 no	 bright	 pennants	 in	 yellow	 or	 green
proclaiming	them	warriors	of	Ferghana	or	Samarkand.	They	were	neither	any	more.
The	 men	 were	 silent	 as	 Babur	 rode	 towards	 them.	 How	 many,	 now	 that	 they	 were	 clear	 of	 the	 city,
would	slip	back	to	their	tribal	lands	or	go	in	search	of	other	rulers	able	to	reward	them	better?
He	watched	as	the	stout	Uzbek	ambassador	approached	on	horseback	over	the	parched	ground.	What
did	he	want?	To	gloat	on	behalf	of	his	master?

‘Well?’
‘	To	mark	the	new	understanding	between	you	and	my	lord,	he	has	come	to	a	joyous	decision.	He	will
take	Her	Royal	Highness,	your	sister,	as	a	wife.’
‘What?’	Babur’s	hand	reached	instinctively	for	his	sword.	For	a	second	he	thought	of	the	ambassador’s
head	bouncing	away,	spurting	blood	as	the	melon	he	had	kicked	had	leaked	its	juice.
‘I	said	that	my	lord,	Shaibani	Khan,	has	decided	to	marry	your	sister,	Khanzada	.	.	.	He	will	take	her
now	.	.	.’
‘Majesty	.	.	.’	Babur	heard	Baisanghar	call	in	alarm.
Babur	looked	up	to	see	lines	of	dark-clad	Uzbek	riders,	bows	at	the	ready,	come	sweeping	round	from
the	direction	of	the	Iron	Gate.	In	a	moment,	Babur	and	his	men	were	surrounded	on	three	sides.	On	the
fourth	they	were	hemmed	in	by	the	stout	city	walls.	An	ambush	.	.	.
‘So,	 this	 is	 how	 Shaibani	 Khan	 keeps	 his	 word	 .	 .	 .’	 Babur	 sprang	 from	 his	 horse,	 pulled	 the
ambassador	from	his	and	had	his	dagger	to	the	man’s	throat.	The	Uzbek	was	strong	and	tried	to	pull	away
but	Babur	allowed	his	blade	to	pierce	the	man’s	skin.	As	a	bead	of	dark	red	blood	welled	up,	the	man
ceased	his	struggling.
‘My	lord	has	not	broken	his	word,’	the	ambassador	gasped.	‘He	promised	you	safe	passage	and	you
will	have	it.	All	he	seeks	is	a	wife.’
‘I’ll	 see	 my	 sister	 dead	 before	 I	 give	 her	 into	 the	 hands	 of	 savages,’	 Babur	 yelled,	 and	 released	 the
man,	who	tumbled	to	the	ground.
‘It	 will	 not	 only	 be	 your	 sister	 who	 dies.’	 The	 ambassador	 held	 the	 end	 of	 his	 turban	 to	 his	 neck	 to
staunch	the	wound.	‘If	you	reject	my	lord’s	offer	he	will	take	it	as	an	insult	and	you	will	all	die	–	you,
your	family	and	your	pitiful	army.	And	he	will	destroy	the	city	and	rebuild	it	over	the	citizens’	bleached
bones.	It	is	your	choice	.	.	.’
Babur	 looked	 at	 the	 Uzbek	 arrows	 trained	 on	 him	 and	 his	 men.	 He	 also	 looked	 at	 the	 pale	 faces	 of
Baisanghar	and	Baburi	who,	the	moment	Babur	had	attacked	the	ambassador,	had	rushed	forward,	swords
drawn.	 The	 anger	 and	 powerlessness	 he	 felt	 were	 written	 on	 their	 faces.	 Again,	 he	 had	 no	 choice.	 It
would	have	been	one	thing	to	lead	out	his	men	in	one	last	glorious	sally,	quite	another	to	submit	them	to
pointless	butchery,	like	animals	in	the	hunt	when	beaters	drive	them	into	a	circle	to	be	shot	down	at	will.
Scanning	the	Uzbek	lines,	Babur	looked	for	the	commanding	figure	of	Shaibani	Khan,	wild	thoughts	of
offering	him	single	combat	running	through	his	mind.	But,	of	course,	the	Uzbek	leader	was	not	there:	he
would	be	preparing	to	ride	back	into	Samarkand.	A	meeting	with	a	throneless	king	would	be	beneath	him.
Babur	 walked	 towards	 the	 bullock	 cart,	 two	 hundred	 yards	 away,	 where	 his	 unsuspecting	 sister	 was
sitting	 with	 their	 mother	 and	 grandmother.	 He	 hesitated,	 then	 pulled	 back	 the	 leather	 curtains	 that
concealed	them.	They	looked	up	at	him	with	alarm.	Then,	as	they	heard	what	he	had	to	say,	they	cried	out
in	 disbelief.	 Tears	 welling	 in	 his	 eyes,	 he	 turned	 away,	 but	 Khanzada’s	 pleas	 not	 to	 abandon	 her	 to	 the
desires	of	a	wild	Uzbek	and	the	cries	of	Kutlugh	Nigar	to	spare	her	daughter	followed	him.	‘I	will	come
for	you,	Khanzada.	I	promise	you	.	.	.	I	will	come	.	.	.’	Babur	shouted.
But	Khanzada	was	past	hearing.

	
	
	

Chapter	12
The	Old	Lady	with
the	Golden	Elephant
	

On	a	February	evening	Babur	gave	the	logs	burning	in	the	large,	open	fireplace	a	poke	with	a	stick	to
coax	more	warmth	from	them.	Although	his	face	and	the	front	of	his	body	were	warm	from	the	direct	heat,
his	 back	 felt	 chill,	 despite	 his	 thick	 brown	 wool	 cloak,	 as	 cold	 winds	 billowed	 the	 hangings	 from	 the
small,	 unglazed	 but	 roughly	 shuttered	 windows	 of	 the	 mud-brick	 house.	 At	 least	 these	 draughts	 would
carry	some	of	the	woodsmoke	out	through	the	chimney.	It	was	so	thick	and	acrid	that	Babur’s	eyes	stung
and	watered.
He	reflected	that	these	were	by	no	means	the	only	tears	he	had	shed	since	the	late	autumn	day	when,
with	the	snows	whirling	round	them,	his	party	of	at	most	two	hundred	had	breasted	the	broad	pass	and
descended	to	the	small	settlement	of	Sayram.	In	truth,	it	was	little	more	than	a	walled	village	of	shepherds
with	two	or	three	inns	to	house	occasional	travellers.	But	it	had	two	attractions	for	Babur.	Its	muscular
headman,	 Hussain	 Mazid,	 was	 a	 cousin	 of	 Ali	 Mazid	 Beg,	 murdered	 by	 Mahmud	 at	 Samarkand,	 and
utterly	 loyal	 to	 Babur.	 The	 other	 advantage	 was	 the	 settlement’s	 remoteness.	 Though	 it	 lay	 on	 a	 minor
trade	route	from	Kashgar,	it	was	as	many	miles	distant	from	the	forces	of	Shaibani	Khan	as	it	was	from
the	outposts	of	Ferghana.
Babur	knew	he	had	been	right	not	to	accept	Jahangir’s	offer	of	sanctuary	made	in	the	aftermath	of	his
expulsion	 from	 Samarkand.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 he	 had	 doubted	 its	 sincerity	 and	 in	 the	 second	 he	 had	 not
wished	to	put	himself	in	the	power	of	his	half-brother	and	his	puppet-master,	Tambal.	Neither	did	he	wish
to	 play	 the	 poor	 relation,	 accepted	 on	 sufferance	 as	 he	 had	 once	 tolerated	 Jahangir	 and	 his	 scheming
mother,	Roxanna.
Babur’s	refusal	had	meant	that	he	couldn’t	entrust	his	womenfolk	to	Jahangir	either.	Without	his	own
presence,	they	would	once	more	have	been	little	better	than	hostages.	In	any	case,	both	Kutlugh	Nigar	and
Esan	Dawlat	had	refused	outright	even	to	contemplate	such	a	prospect.	They	had	preferred	to	share	the
danger	and	deprivation	of	his	wanderings.
At	least	now	they	had	a	roof	over	their	heads	and	privacy	in	the	small	room	they	shared	in	this	draughty
building.	But	Babur	wept	to	see	them	take	turns	to	use	the	only	fine-toothed	ivory	comb	they	had	left	to
remove	the	white	eggs	of	lice	from	their	unfurled	long	hair.	Neither	had	uttered	a	complaint	about	that	or
the	 bedbugs,	 which,	 breeding	 deep	 in	 crevasses	 in	 the	 wall,	 infested	 bed	 linen	 and	 garments	 whatever
precautions	were	taken.	Nor	had	they	complained	about	the	cold	or	the	limited	food	–	gristly	horsemeat
and	turnips	served	daily	from	a	large	fat-encrusted	cauldron	in	the	kitchen.	Esan	Dawlat	had	compared	it
to	the	food	of	her	revered	ancestor,	Genghis	Khan.
In	his	despair,	Babur	had	expected	his	mother	and	grandmother	to	blame	him	for	surrendering	Khanzada
to	Shaibani	Khan	but,	as	usual,	Esan	Dawlat	had	surprised	him.	Late	one	morning	she	had	found	him	still
in	 his	 sleeping	 quarters,	 silently	 sobbing,	 curled	 into	 a	 foetus	 position	 with	 his	 head	 turned	 to	 the	 mud
wall.	‘What	is	it,	Babur,	that	makes	you	so	forget	your	position	and	your	manhood?’	she	had	asked.	When

he	had	not	replied,	she	had	asked	again,	more	gently,	‘Come	now,	what	is	it?’
He	 had	 uncoiled	 himself	 and	 faced	 her,	 eyes	 red-rimmed	 with	 tears.	 ‘Don’t	 you	 know?	 Can’t	 you
guess?	 I’m	 despondent	 that	 I’ve	 lost	 Samarkand	 once	 more	 but,	 above	 all,	 I	 feel	 such	 terrible,	 terrible
guilt	 about	 meekly	 yielding	 Khanzada	 to	 Shaibani	 Khan.	 I	 feel	 dishonour	 that	 I	 failed	 in	 my	 duty	 as	 the
head	 of	 our	 family,	 and	 as	 a	 man,	 to	 protect	 my	 only	 sister,	 whom	 I	 love	 so	 much.	 I	 feel	 a	 desperate
impotence	that	I’m	in	such	a	diminished	position	that	I	can	still	do	nothing	to	recover	her.’
Esan	 Dawlat	 had	 taken	 his	 large	 hand	 in	 her	 small	 ones.	 Then	 she	 had	 reminded	 him	 of	 the	 fate	 of
Genghis	Khan’s	first	wife.	‘Long	before	he	became	the	Great	Oceanic	Ruler,	he	married	a	young	Qongarit
woman,	a	sturdy	beauty	named	Borte,	and,	with	the	support	of	her	clan,	attempted	to	increase	his	power
through	a	conflict	with	a	neighbouring	clan,	the	Markit.	However,	he	was	inexperienced	and	the	Markit
were	cunning.	In	a	surprise	raid	on	his	camp,	the	Markit	carried	off	Borte	and	killed	or	scattered	most	of
Genghis’s	followers.	He	fled	alone	into	the	Kentei	mountains	where	the	Markit	were	unable	to	find	him,
so	well	did	the	mountains	protect	him.	For	the	rest	of	his	life,	Genghis	Khan	prayed	every	day	to	the	deity
of	the	mountain,	and	every	day	offered	him	a	sacrifice.
‘Only	 a	 year	 later,	 with	 the	 help	 of	 forces	 recruited	 by	 the	 Qongarit,	 he	 defeated	 the	 Markit	 and
recovered	Borte.	When,	several	months	afterwards,	she	gave	birth	to	her	first	child,	Jorchi,	no	one	dared
question	his	paternity.	He	grew	up	to	become	one	of	Genghis	Khan’s	greatest	generals.
‘Both	 you	 and	 Khanzada	 have	 Genghis	 Khan	 and	 Borte’s	 blood	 in	 your	 veins.	 You	 have	 the	 courage
never	 to	 despair	 but	 to	 confront	 harsh	 fate	 and	 come	 through	 to	 eventual	 victory.’	 Esan	 Dawlat	 had
gripped	his	hand	firmly.	‘Strengthen	your	will,	difficult	as	it	may	be.	Steel	yourself	to	look	only	forward,
not	back.’
Even	now,	despite	his	grandmother’s	words,	the	thought	of	Shaibani	Khan’s	rough	hands	on	his	sister’s
soft	 flesh	 exploring	 the	 most	 intimate	 parts	 of	 her	 body	 came	 into	 his	 mind,	 provoking	 nausea	 and
revulsion.	 Clenching	 his	 fists,	 he	 summoned	 all	 his	 mental	 strength	 to	 push	 the	 images	 away.	 Then	 he
prayed	that	his	sister	would	retain	the	will	to	live	–	as	Borte	had	done	–	and	submit	to	Shaibani	Khan.
Her	resistance	could	only	lead	to	her	death.	He	would	fight	for	both	of	them	to	crush	Shaibani	Khan	and
rescue	her	and	the	family	honour.
Although	 it	 was	 approaching	 midnight	 and	 all	 in	 the	 hall	 around	 him	 were	 asleep,	 as	 the	 occasional
stertorous	 snore	 testified,	 Babur	 was	 too	 disturbed	 by	 his	 recollections,	 too	 full	 of	 powerless,	 restless
anger	at	what	had	happened	and,	above	all,	too	worried	about	what	lay	ahead	for	himself	and	his	family
to	 attempt	 to	 sleep.	 Instead,	 blood	 pumping	 furiously	 but	 futilely,	 he	 pulled	 his	 cloak	 about	 him	 and
stepped	 over	 the	 recumbent	 bodies	 of	 some	 of	 his	 retainers	 into	 the	 cold	 of	 the	 night	 to	 compose	 his
thoughts,	cool	his	mind	and	slow	his	pulse.
Outside,	the	sky	was	a	mass	of	stars	and	the	snow	that	had	fallen	earlier	had	frozen	into	grains	of	ice,
which	 the	 biting	 wind	 was	 blowing	 in	 flurries	 across	 the	 compound.	 Babur	 made	 his	 way	 to	 the	 mud
walls	surrounding	the	village.	He	climbed	up	the	rough	steps	on	to	them	and	looked	out	over	the	shadowy
white	landscape.	Above	the	pass,	the	mountain	peaks	glistened	silver	as	the	moonlight	struck	them.	The
pure	beauty	of	the	scene	took	his	breath	away.
Suddenly,	from	the	direction	of	the	animal	pens,	he	heard	an	isolated	cry,	then	another	shout	followed
by	 uproar.	 A	 minute	 or	 so	 later	 a	 dark	 animal	 shape	 shot	 across	 the	 snow	 directly	 below	 him	 and	 off
across	the	frozen	ground	out	into	the	darkness.	As	it	went,	pursued	by	unavailing	arrows	fired	by	the	men
who	had	been	guarding	the	animal	pens	and	had	come	running	after	it,	Babur	saw	that	it	was	a	long,	lean
grey	wolf,	with	something	in	its	mouth	–	probably	a	chicken.
‘Did	you	get	him	.	.	.’	Babur	called	to	one	of	the	guards	as	he	ran	close	by	beneath	the	walls.
‘No,	Majesty.	That	is	a	cunning	wolf	that	has	been	harassing	our	animals	for	the	last	few	nights.	At	first

he	found	a	way	into	the	horses’	enclosure	and	tried	to	attack	one	of	last	year’s	foals.	It	had	been	sick	and
we	were	nursing	it.	The	horses	beat	him	off	with	their	hoofs.	Last	evening,	he	got	into	the	sheep	pen	and
by	the	time	we	drove	him	off	he	had	bitten	one	of	the	smaller	ewes	so	badly	we	had	to	kill	it	–	in	fact,
Majesty,	it	was	in	your	stew	this	evening	as	a	change	from	the	horsemeat.	But	tonight	the	wolf	got	into	one
of	the	hen	houses	and	took	one	before	the	cackling	of	the	rest	disturbed	us.	He’s	been	rewarded	for	his
persistence.’
Babur	peered	out	into	the	dark	again,	towards	where	the	victorious	wolf	had	vanished.	Perhaps	it	had	a
message	for	him.	Face	reality,	persist	as	Genghis	Khan	–	and	Timur	–	had	done.	Try	a	different	approach
to	your	goal.	Never	give	up	until	you	have	your	reward.	The	wolf	had	been	rebuffed	in	his	attempts	on
both	 the	 sheep	 and	 horse	 folds	 but	 had	 succeeded	 in	 his	 attack	 on	 the	 hens.	 Perhaps	 he	 himself	 should
concentrate	less	on	Samarkand	and	Ferghana	for	a	while	and	consider	whether	there	were	other	places
where	 he	 might	 establish	 himself	 as	 a	 ruler	 before	 expanding	 his	 empire.	 His	 hero	 Timur	 after	 all	 had
rampaged	from	China	to	India	and	Turkey.
As	 Babur	 descended	 from	 the	 walls	 and	 retraced	 his	 steps	 to	 the	 house,	 he	 passed	 the	 low,	 singlestorey	hut	where	the	women	servants	lived.	For	the	first	time	in	a	long	while,	he	found	himself	repeating
out	loud	his	father’s	mantra:	‘Timur’s	blood	is	my	blood.’	For	what	remained	of	the	night	he,	for	once,
slept	deeply	and	well.

‘The	grey	is	faster	than	the	roan	.	.	.	anyone	can	see	that.’
‘You’re	wrong,	Baburi.	When	the	snows	melt	and	we	can	ride	again	I’ll	prove	it	to	you.’	Babur	held	his
hands	to	the	fire.
Hearing	 the	 door	 open	 and	 feeling	 a	 chill	 blast	 of	 air,	 Babur	 looked	 round	 to	 see	 Hussain	 Mazid
approaching,	 his	 height	 and	 bulk	 almost	 comically	 accentuated	 by	 the	 small	 hunched	 form	 of	 an	 old
woman,	wrapped	in	a	dark	green	quilted	jacket,	by	his	side.	Despite	her	apparent	age	and	fragility,	she
was	keeping	up	pretty	well	with	Hussain	Mazid	with	the	aid	of	a	stick.
The	ill-assorted	couple	stopped	before	Babur	and	made	the	customary	salutations.
‘This	is	Rehana,	Majesty,’	Hussain	Mazid	explained,	seeing	Babur’s	surprise.	‘She	was	my	wet-nurse
when	I	was	young	and	she	still	serves	the	family.	This	morning	she	came	to	me	early.	She	said	that,	woken
by	 the	 disturbance	 following	 the	 wolf’s	 raid	 on	 the	 animal	 pens	 last	 night,	 she	 heard	 you	 talking	 to
yourself	about	Timur	as	you	passed	the	kitchen	of	the	women	servants’	quarters	where	she	was	boiling
some	tea.	She	reminded	me	–	as	I	well	knew	from	her	tales	in	my	childhood	–	that	her	grandfather	had
ridden	with	Timur	in	his	raid	on	Delhi	and	had	often	spoken	to	her	of	it.	She	asked	whether	you	too	might
wish	to	hear	his	stories.	I	told	her	you	wouldn’t	want	to	be	bothered	with	an	old	soldier’s	tales	secondhand	from	an	old	woman.	But	she	insisted,	so	I	have	brought	her	to	you.’
At	this,	Rehana	looked	up	at	Babur	and	he	was	touched	by	the	pride	in	her	eyes.
‘I	would	be	glad	to	hear	of	my	ancestor’s	deeds.	Make	Rehana	comfortable	by	the	fire	and	have	one	of
the	servants	bring	us	tea.’
Slowly	Rehana	eased	her	old	bones	on	to	a	stool.
‘Do	begin.’
Rehana	seemed	suddenly	shy,	as	if	uncertain	where	to	start	now	that	her	request	to	speak	of	a	revered
relation	in	such	exalted	company	had	been	granted.	She	stammered,	then	fell	silent.
‘What	was	your	grandfather’s	name?’	Babur	prompted	her	gently.

‘Tariq.’
‘What	was	his	position	in	Timur’s	army?’
‘He	was	a	horse	archer	–	one	of	the	best.’
‘And	where	did	he	first	see	Timur?’
‘In	Samarkand	in	the	summer	of	1398,	just	as	the	preparations	for	his	attack	on	Hindustan	–	Northern
India	 –	 were	 getting	 under	 way.	 His	 father	 –	 a	 veteran	 of	 one	 of	 Timur’s	 previous	 campaigns	 –	 had
brought	him	to	join	up,	and	he	was	among	the	recruits	Timur	reviewed	in	the	Garden	of	Heart’s	Delight
just	beyond	the	walls	of	Samarkand.’
‘What	did	he	remember	of	how	Timur	looked	then?’
‘He	was	nearly	sixty	–	only	twenty	years	younger	than	I	am	now,’	said	Rehana,	with	the	pride	that	old
people	have	in	reaching	a	good	age.	She	paused	as	if	expecting	congratulation.
Babur	did	not	disappoint	her.	‘I	would	never	have	thought	you	had	seen	so	many	seasons.’
She	smiled.	‘But	my	grandfather	said	Timur	was	tall	and	still	unbowed,	with	thick	white	hair.	His	brow
was	 broad,	 his	 voice	 deep	 and	 his	 shoulders	 wide.	 When	 he	 walked	 he	 had	 a	 pronounced	 limp	 from	 a
serious	injury	to	his	right	leg	when,	as	a	youth,	he	had	been	thrown	from	his	horse.	It	had	left	that	leg	much
shorter	 than	 the	 other	 .	 .	 .’	 Rehana	 was	 in	 full	 stride	 now,	 timidity	 gone,	 rocking	 a	 little	 as	 she	 spoke.
Babur	guessed	she	had	told	this	tale	many	times	before	in	her	long	life.
‘Mounting	his	gilded	throne,	Timur	addressed	his	men.	“We	prepare	to	go	across	the	Hindu	Kush,	down
through	the	passes,	across	the	Indus	to	Hindustan’s	rich	capital	of	Delhi.	Not	even	Alexander	reached	that
city.	Or	Genghis	Khan	who	only	got	as	far	as	the	Indus.	The	prize	is	great.	Hindustan	is	full	of	riches	–
gold,	 emeralds	 and	 rubies.	 It	 has	 the	 only	 mine	 in	 the	 known	 world	 for	 the	 bright	 diamond.	 But	 its
inhabitants	do	not	deserve	such	jewels.	Although	some	of	the	rulers	follow	our	God,	most	of	the	people
are	cowardly	infidels,	worshipping	idols	of	distorted	half-human,	half-animal	deities.	God	will	take	any
who	die	fighting	them	straight	to	Paradise.	He	will	grant	us	great	victories	over	them	and	their	rulers	who
weakly	tolerate	unbelief	among	their	subjects.	We	will	take	immense	booty.”
‘Soon	 afterwards	 the	 army	 departed.	 A	 thick	 pall	 of	 dust	 hung	 over	 the	 parched	 grasslands	 outside
Samarkand	as	ninety	thousand	men	–	mostly	on	horseback	–	manoeuvred	into	formation	and	moved	off.
Within	 three	 days	 they	 had	 passed	 Shakhrish,	 the	 Green	 City,	 Timur’s	 birthplace,	 and	 descended	 the
strongly	garrisoned	defile	known	as	the	Iron	Gates	out	on	to	the	scrubby	red	desert	plain,	the	Kizl	Kum.
‘On	 and	 on	 they	 marched,	 across	 the	 Oxus,	 past	 Balkh	 and	 Andarab,	 all	 the	 time	 still	 within	 the
boundaries	of	Timur’s	empire.	And	then	Timur	took	an	advance	party	of	thirty	thousand	–	my	grandfather
among	them	–	up	through	the	Khawak	Pass	on	to	the	roof	of	the	world	and	into	the	Hindu	Kush.	There,
they	 encountered	 early	 winter	 and	 conditions	 unknown	 to	 plainsmen.	 Their	 horses	 slipped	 on	 the	 ice.
Some	fell	with	their	riders	to	their	death.	Others	broke	legs	and	were	fit	only	for	the	cooking	pot.
‘Timur	 ordered	 the	 men	 to	 rest	 by	 day	 and	 travel	 by	 night	 when	 the	 ice	 was	 frozen	 solid	 and	 less
slippery	 than	 during	 daytime	 when	 it	 had	 a	 coating	 of	 meltwater.	 Soon	 they	 reached	 an	 escarpment	 that
was	impossible	to	descend	without	ropes.	Now	–	my	grandfather	told	me	–	Timur	had	to	be	lowered	on	a
litter	by	his	men	a	hundred	feet	down	a	rocky	cliff	since	he	could	not	make	the	climb	down	himself.	The
cold	had	reopened	the	old	scar	on	his	right	leg	and	he	dared	not	trust	the	limb	with	his	full	weight.	And	all
the	time	they	were	fighting	off	ambushes	by	the	local	tribe,	the	infidel	Kafirs.	The	snow	was	often	stained
bright	red	with	blood	.	.	.
‘But	after	many	struggles	they	reached	Kabul.	My	grandfather	told	me	it	was	a	fine	city,	overlooked	by
a	 hilltop	 fort,	 and	 at	 a	 point	 where	 great	 trade	 routes	 meet.	 Smaller	 and	 less	 grand	 than	 Samarkand,	 of
course,	but	very	splendid	nonetheless.’
‘Indeed,	I	believe	it	still	is,’	Babur	murmured	to	Baburi.	‘One	of	my	father’s	cousins	rules	it.’

‘You	have	relatives	on	every	throne,	just	as	I	have	friends	behind	every	market	stall	in	Samarkand	.	.	.’
‘Ignore	us,	Rehana,	and	continue.’
‘By	September,	Timur	had	crossed	the	Indus	using	a	bridge	made	of	boats	lashed	together	and	was	just
five	hundred	miles	from	Delhi.	Everywhere	his	troops	took	prisoners,	destined	for	the	slave	markets	of
Samarkand	on	their	return	but	for	the	present	forced	to	serve	them	as	they	marched.	My	grandfather	had
five.	His	particular	favourite	was	a	small,	dark-eyed	orphan	called	Ravi.
‘In	December,	Timur’s	advance	patrols	sighted	the	great	domes	and	minarets	within	Delhi’s	walls.	But
the	 Sultan	 of	 Delhi	 had	 a	 strong	 army,	 including	 a	 hundred	 and	 fifty	 of	 his	 most	 feared	 weapon	 –	 the
armoured	elephants	with	their	shining	coats	of	overlapping	steel	plates	and	curved	scimitars	attached	to
their	long	ivory	tusks.
‘Timur	wanted	to	avoid	a	costly	and	uncertain	assault	on	the	walls	and	provoked	the	sultan’s	cavalry	to
make	a	sally	against	him.	But	before	long	the	sultan’s	troops,	amid	heavy	fighting,	retreated	back	into	the
city	through	the	same	gate	out	of	which	they	had	charged.’
Rehana	paused.	‘Here	I	come	to	a	melancholy	part	of	the	story.	The	prisoners	had	let	out	a	huge	cheer
of	support	for	the	sultan’s	men,	hoping	to	be	freed	if	the	sultan	were	victorious.	Timur	had	heard	this	and
feared	that	their	ardour	might	lead	them	–	they	numbered	nearly	a	hundred	thousand	–	to	rebel	when	the
next	battle	took	place.
‘Determined	and	unsentimental,	he	ordered	that	all	the	prisoners	should	be	killed.	What	is	more,	each
man	should	execute	his	own	captives.
‘Men	 wept	 as	 they	 killed	 in	 cold	 blood.	 Even	 women	 prisoners	 who	 had	 become	 loving	 concubines
were	 slain,	 and	 some	 say	 Timur	 made	 the	 women	 of	 his	 harem	 kill	 captives	 who	 had	 served	 them.	 My
grandfather	killed	his	adult	prisoners	but	could	not	kill	Ravi.	He	ordered	him	to	run	and	hide	among	some
dunes.	However,	when	he	returned	later,	he	found	Ravi’s	body	half	concealed	by	a	scrubby	bush	under
which	he	must	have	been	trying	to	hide,	his	head	cleft	almost	in	two.	I	always	remember	my	grandfather
saying	that	it	looked	like	a	ripe	melon	cut	in	half	on	a	market	stall	in	Samarkand	and	that	the	carnage	all
around	looked	and	smelled	as	if	he	were	among	the	butchers’	stalls	there.
‘Timur	hoped	that	the	killings	would	provoke	the	Sultan	of	Delhi	into	another	attack	and	he	prepared
for	 battle.	 To	 guard	 against	 the	 much-feared	 elephants,	 he	 ordered	 his	 soldiers	 –	 whether	 cavalry	 or
infantry,	officers	or	men	–	in	front	of	their	lines	to	dig	deep	trenches	and	pile	the	earth	they	dug	out	into
ramparts.	Next,	he	had	the	blacksmiths	stoke	their	fires	to	their	whitest	heat	and	beat	out	three-pronged,
sharp-tipped	iron	stakes	to	strew	where	the	elephants	were	most	likely	to	charge.	He	had	buffaloes	roped
together	by	the	head	and	feet	with	leather	strips,	then	tied	up	behind	the	stakes	and	in	front	of	the	trenches.
He	ordered	camels	to	be	loaded	with	wood	and	dried	grass,	lashed	together	and	held	in	reserve.	Finally,
he	told	the	archers	to	fire	only	at	the	elephants’	drivers	who	sat	exposed	on	the	beasts’	necks	just	behind
their	ears.	With	them	dead,	the	elephants	would	run	out	of	control.
‘In	the	middle	of	December	–	I	remember	my	grandfather	said	the	skies	were	grey	and	the	weather	cool
–	the	sultan’s	men	indeed	sallied	out	once	more,	just	as	Timur	had	hoped,	the	great	brass	kettle-drums	on
the	beasts’	backs	sounding	and	the	very	ground	seeming	to	shake	under	their	huge	feet.
‘But	 then	 my	 grandfather	 saw	 the	 wisdom	 of	 Timur’s	 plan.	 The	 elephants	 never	 reached	 their	 lines.
Stumbling	 on	 the	 pointed	 iron	 tripods,	 they	 came	 almost	 to	 a	 halt	 among	 the	 bullocks.	 Then	 Timur
unleashed	his	masterstroke.	He	set	fire	to	the	wood	and	dry	grass	on	the	camels’	backs,	then	drove	them
towards	the	elephants.	The	great	beasts	panicked	and	fled,	throwing	the	soldiers	from	their	backs	as	they
did	 so	 and	 trampling	 others	 in	 their	 fear,	 crushing	 their	 heads	 beneath	 their	 feet.	 Victory	 was	 Timur’s.
Delhi	was	his.
‘Although	Timur’s	official	command	was	that	no	man	should	enter	Delhi	without	permission,	it	was	one

of	 the	 few	 of	 his	 orders	 not	 strictly	 enforced.	 Our	 soldiers	 were	 everywhere,	 looking	 for	 booty	 –	 for
women	too,	I	dare	say.	My	grandfather	was	among	them,	drinking	spirits	from	a	tavern	abandoned	by	its
owner,	 when	 rumours	 spread	 of	 a	 rising	 by	 the	 local	 inhabitants	 who	 had	 already	 killed	 several	 of	 our
men	.	.	.
‘Half	drunk,	the	soldiers	rushed	out	into	the	streets.	In	their	dizzy	heads	they	saw	enemies	everywhere
and	killed	anyone	who	crossed	their	path.	Soon	they	were	setting	fire	to	shops	and	houses	just	to	see	the
flames	rip	through	them.
‘As	the	drink	drained	from	my	grandfather,	he	grew	ashamed	and	entered	a	tall,	narrow	house.	Here	he
found	a	small	boy,	about	the	age	of	Ravi,	hiding	in	a	marble	bath.	The	reminder	of	Ravi	and	his	cleft	head
sobered	him	further.	He	gestured	to	the	boy	to	conceal	himself	instead	in	a	large	chest	in	the	corner	of	the
room	and	told	him	not	to	come	out	until	it	was	safe.’
Rehana	 fumbled	 in	 the	 inside	 pocket	 of	 her	 quilted	 coat	 and	 drew	 out	 a	 small	 object	 wrapped	 in	 a
fragment	 of	 gold-embroidered	 purple	 silk.	 As	 she	 removed	 the	 cloth,	 Babur	 saw	 a	 very	 small	 golden
elephant	with	rubies	for	eyes.	She	held	it	out	to	him.	‘The	boy	gave	him	this	and	my	grandfather	passed	it
to	me	as	he	had	no	other	surviving	grandchildren	–	the	others	had	died	from	the	smallpox	that	broke	out
just	after	my	birth.
‘Before	he	left,	my	grandfather	wrote	a	notice	in	our	language	of	Turki	to	say	that	the	house	had	been
searched	and	contained	nothing	of	value.	Knowing	he	was	one	of	the	few	of	our	soldiers	who	could	read,
he	also	drew	a	picture	showing	a	man	barred	from	entry.	He	pinned	both	to	the	door.
‘After	two	days	Timur	stopped	the	massacres	and	burnings.	My	grandfather’s	note	and	drawing	must
have	been	good	because	when	he	returned	that	way	he	found	the	house	intact	and	the	boy	sitting	on	the
front	step	.	.	.
‘My	grandfather	–	like	all	the	other	soldiers	–	acquired	much	treasure.’	Rehana’s	eyes	closed	in	near
ecstasy.	‘In	the	sultan’s	palace	they	found	subterranean	vaults	filled	with	gems	–	smooth,	lustrous	pearls,
scarlet	rubies,	sapphires	blue	as	the	sky,	glittering	diamonds	from	the	mines	in	the	south	–	and	piles	of
silver	and	gold	coins,	all	exactly	as	Timur	had	promised.	My	grandfather	was	given	his	share.	In	addition,
he	took	ornate	armour	and	two	white	parrots	he	found	in	a	cage	in	a	deserted	house.
‘Suddenly,	after	just	three	weeks	in	Delhi,	Timur	gave	the	order	to	leave.	Slowly	his	armies	made	their
way	 back	 north	 and	 east,	 sometimes	 travelling	 only	 four	 miles	 a	 day,	 so	 burdened	 were	 they	 with	 their
riches.	 Long	 before	 they	 reached	 Samarkand,	 my	 grandfather	 had	 gambled	 away	 his	 booty,	 except	 this
golden	elephant	and	the	white	parrots.
‘But	his	eyes	always	lit	up	when	he	spoke	of	Hindustan	–	India.	His	tales	were	seldom	of	battles	and
even	less	of	his	own	doings.	Much	more	often	he	spoke	of	the	well-watered	green	fields	where	many	fat
cattle	and	sheep	grazed,	of	beautiful	sandstone	and	marble	buildings	and	of	Hindustan’s	great	wealth	in
gems.	Above	all,	he	said	that	the	wonders	of	that	land	were	beyond	description.	They	must	be	seen	to	be
believed	.	.	.’
Rehana	had	finished,	and	a	smile	illuminated	her	lined	face.
‘You	have	brought	one	of	Timur’s	greatest	triumphs	to	life	for	me.’	Babur	had	been	transported	by	the
pictures	she	had	painted.	‘What	you	have	told	us	of	Timur’s	methods	and	of	Hindustan	is	so	remarkable
that	I	will	ask	one	of	the	scribes	to	write	it	down,	not	only	so	that	others	can	be	reminded	of	his	great
deeds	but	so	that	I	can	consult	it	again.	Thank	you.’
Rehana	rose	and,	with	the	aid	of	her	stick,	made	her	way	out	of	the	room.	To	Babur	it	seemed	that	her
step	was	a	little	lighter.
‘Majesty.’	Hussain	Mazid	had	spoken.	‘Why	didn’t	Timur	absorb	Hindustan	into	his	empire?’
‘I	 don’t	 know.	 My	 father	 was	 fond	 of	 quoting	 some	 lines	 of	 a	 poem	 about	 Timur’s	 raid.	 I	 can’t

remember	the	words	precisely	but	it	was	something	like	“Nothing	stirred,	not	even	a	bird,	within	Delhi
for	two	months	after	its	sack”,	and	that	Timur’s	route	through	Hindustan	was	“lined	with	a	multitude	of
corpses	which	infected	the	air”.	Poets	exaggerate	but	perhaps	even	Timur	felt	it	would	be	too	difficult	to
rule	a	place	where	he	had	wrought	so	much	destruction	.	.	.	Perhaps	he	was	also	conscious	that	he	was
growing	old	and	still	had	much	to	do	–	more	conquests	to	make,	more	booty	to	win.	After	all,	he	stayed	in
Samarkand	 only	 four	 months	 after	 his	 return	 from	 Delhi,	 then	 moved	 west	 to	 the	 shores	 of	 the
Mediterranean	Sea	to	capture	Aleppo	and	Damascus	and	–	at	the	battle	of	Ankara	–	to	take	prisoner	the
great	 emperor	 of	 the	 Ottoman	 Turks,	 Bayazid	 the	 Thunderbolt.	 He	 imprisoned	 him	 in	 a	 cage	 that
accompanied	the	court	on	its	travels.	They	say	he	cried	like	a	baby	behind	his	bars	.	.	.	And	of	course,
Timur	died	on	the	road	to	China	.	.	.	Hindustan	was	just	one	of	his	campaigns	.	.	.’
‘Rehana	 is	 certainly	 right	 about	 Hindustan’s	 fine	 jewels.	 Sometimes	 traders	 used	 to	 bring	 them	 to
Samarkand	to	sell	and	they	were	of	great	lustre,’	said	Baburi.	‘I	often	wondered	what	it	would	be	like	to
see	that	country.’
‘Perhaps	you	will,’	Babur	said	thoughtfully.	‘Last	night	on	the	battlements	I	pondered	whether	I	should
consider	 beginning	 my	 empire	 somewhere	 other	 than	 in	 Samarkand.	 Rehana	 bringing	 me	 her	 ancestor’s
story	of	Timur’s	conquest	of	Hindustan	seems	almost	like	an	omen.’

‘Come	on,’	Babur	yelled.	The	barely	thawed	ground	beneath	his	naked	soles	was	stony	and	the	hill	was
steep	 but	 he	 drove	 his	 aching	 body	 on.	 Baburi	 was	 quick	 –	 Babur	 could	 hear	 his	 steady	 panting	 just	 a
couple	 of	 yards	 behind	 –	 but	 he	 was	 quicker	 and	 the	 knowledge	 pleased	 him	 .	 .	 .	 With	 the	 coming	 of
spring,	the	desire	for	action	stirred	within	him	once	more,	and	with	it	the	determination	to	be	ready,	to
harden	his	body	for	the	challenges	ahead.	Every	day	for	the	past	two	weeks	he	had	gone	running	through
these	remote	hills	and	valleys	and	dived	naked	into	the	chill	rivers	with	only	Baburi	for	company.	There
was	little	danger	of	meeting	anything	more	hostile	than	a	herd	of	mangy	goats.
In	 his	 mind	 he	 felt	 more	 than	 prepared.	 His	 struggle	 with	 Shaibani	 Khan	 was	 not	 over	 –	 and	 never
could	be	until	he	had	fulfilled	his	promise	to	Khanzada	to	rescue	her.	After	that,	who	knew?	Samarkand
held	 a	 special	 place	 in	 his	 heart	 but	 he	 was	 unable	 to	 get	 out	 of	 his	 thoughts	 the	 rich	 and	 exotic	 world
beyond	the	jagged,	snowy	summits	of	the	Hindu	Kush.	If	Timur	had	gone	there,	why	shouldn’t	he?

	
	
	

Chapter	13
On	the	Run
	

After	 a	 day’s	 hunting	 Babur	 was	 riding	 slowly	 back	 towards	 Sayram.	 Around	 him	 in	 the	 fields	 the
country	people,	their	womenfolk	in	bright	garments	of	red,	green	and	blue,	were	stooping	to	prepare	the
ground	for	the	planting	of	the	season’s	corn.	Suddenly	Babur	spotted	three	riders	raising	golden	dust	as
they	 galloped	 towards	 him	 from	 the	 settlement	 with	 the	 late-afternoon	 sun	 behind	 them.	 As	 they
approached,	 he	 recognised	 two	 members	 of	 his	 bodyguard.	 The	 third	 was	 a	 stranger.	 When	 the	 three
pulled	up,	he	jumped	from	his	horse	and	flung	himself	on	to	the	dry	ground	before	Babur.
‘Rise.	Who	are	you?’
‘A	messenger	from	your	half-brother	Jahangir.	I	give	thanks	to	God	that	I	have	found	you	at	last.	I	have
searched	for	many	days.	You	were	hard	to	find.’
‘Deliberately	so.	These	are	troubled	times.	What	message	do	you	bring	from	Jahangir?	I	did	not	think	to
hear	from	him	–	at	least,	not	while	fortune’s	hand	is	against	me.’
‘It	has	turned	against	my	master	too.	Shaibani	Khan	is	invading	Ferghana	from	the	west.	King	Jahangir
beseeches	you	to	come	immediately	with	whatever	forces	you	can	muster.’
‘Why	should	I?	He	did	not	send	the	men	I	asked	for	to	help	me	defend	Samarkand.’
‘I	know	nothing	of	that,	Majesty.	What	I	do	know	is	that	the	people	of	Ferghana	are	in	great	fear	and
need	your	help.’
Babur	did	not	reply	immediately	Then	he	said,	‘That	is	a	good	reason	but	I	must	think	about	my	answer.
Meanwhile	we	must	return	to	the	settlement.	There	you	may	wash	and	eat.’
Two	 hours	 later,	 Babur	 made	 his	 way	 to	 the	 rooms	 occupied	 by	 his	 mother	 and	 grandmother.	 As	 he
approached	he	could	hear	Esan	Dawlat’s	lute.	When	he	entered	she	put	it	down	and	his	mother	laid	aside
her	embroidery.	‘You	have	heard	about	the	message	from	Jahangir?’	he	said.
‘Of	course.	How	will	you	respond?’
‘I	have	thought	hard	over	the	last	hour.	I	have	no	love	for	Jahangir,	who	has	usurped	my	rightful	throne,
and	even	less	for	Tambal.	However,	as	a	man	of	honour	I	can	respond	in	only	one	way.	I	must	help	defend
Ferghana	 against	 the	 barbarous	 Uzbeks	 –	 the	 blood-enemies	 of	 our	 people.	 I	 love	 my	 birthplace.	 It	 is
where	my	father	lies	in	his	tomb.	I	have	many	fond	memories	of	a	happy	childhood	there	with	both	of	you,
and	with	him	while	he	lived.	I	cannot	stand	by	while	my	homeland	is	violated	and	subjugated.	I	and	what
men	I	can	muster	ride	for	Akhsi	immediately.’
‘Neither	your	mother	nor	I	would	expect	any	less	of	you,’	said	Esan	Dawlat.

Purple	 rainclouds	 ringed	 Mount	 Beshtor’s	 spiky	 crown	 –	 a	 sight	 Babur	 had	 often	 seen	 in	 his	 youth.	 A
storm	 was	 blowing	 in	 from	 the	 east	 and	 in	 an	 hour	 or	 less	 would	 burst	 over	 them.	 They	 should	 find
shelter,	Babur	thought.	Anyway,	they	had	been	almost	ten	hours	in	the	saddle.	It	was	time	they	rested.	He
pulled	his	feet	from	the	stirrups	and	let	his	legs	hang	loose,	feeling	his	stiff	thighs	and	calves	relax.	His

black	stallion	moved	restlessly	beneath	him	and	he	patted	its	sweating	neck.
‘We	will	make	camp	over	there.’	He	pointed	to	a	clump	of	red-barked	spiraea	trees	about	two	hundred
yards	away	that	would	give	them	cover	from	the	rain	and	from	spying	eyes.	When	he	was	young,	Wazir
Khan	had	given	him	a	handle	for	his	riding	whip	cunningly	carved	from	spiraea	to	resemble	a	fox	with
open	jaws	and	lolling	tongue.	But	this	was	no	time	for	nostalgic	thoughts	of	the	past	and	the	dead.	The
strong	supple	wood	of	the	spiraea	was	good	for	making	arrows	and	they	would	need	plenty	of	those	in	the
days	ahead.	‘Baisanghar,	post	sentries	on	that	hill	over	there.’
Babur	dismounted	and	tethered	his	stallion	to	a	tree.	They	had	left	Sayram	in	such	haste	that	there	had
been	no	time	to	bring	tents.	No	matter.	He	drew	his	maroon	riding	cloak	tight	round	him	and	sat	down,	his
back	against	a	rock,	as	some	of	his	men	went	deeper	into	the	trees	with	their	bows	to	hunt	pheasants	and
pigeons	while	others	gathered	wood	for	a	fire.
He	had	never	thought	his	return	to	Ferghana	would	be	like	this.
‘Majesty?’
Babur	looked	up	to	see	Baburi.
‘You	look	sad.’
‘I	am,	Baburi,	In	two	days’	time,	perhaps	sooner,	we’ll	be	at	Akhsi.	But	we	may	be	too	late.’
‘We	came	as	fast	as	we	could	.	.	.’
‘True.	But	this	is	my	homeland.	Samarkand	so	dazzled	me	that	I	forgot	that.	If	I	’d	been	less	recklessly
ambitious	I	might	still	be	its	king.	And	Shaibani	Khan	wouldn’t	have	got	his	filthy	hands	on	my	sister	.	.	.’
‘Nobody’s	 safe	 from	 the	 Uzbeks.	 Shaibani	 Khan	 will	 be	 your	 enemy	 until	 you	 –	 or	 someone	 else	 –
slices	off	his	bastard	head	.	.	.’
Babur	 nodded.	 Baburi	 was	 probably	 right.	 Things	 might	 not	 have	 been	 so	 different.	 The	 guilt	 and
melancholy	 that	 had	 descended	 as	 the	 familiar,	 rugged	 outlines	 of	 Mount	 Beshtor	 had	 emerged	 on	 the
horizon	lifted	a	little.
It	was	beginning	to	rain.	Babur	stood	up	and	lifted	his	face	to	it,	feeling	the	drops	run	down	his	cheeks.
If	this	continued	there	would	be	no	fire	tonight.	Instead	of	spitted	game,	they	would	eat	stale	bread	and	the
sweet	 dried	 apricots	 they	 had	 carried	 in	 their	 saddlebags	 from	 Sayram	 and	 sleep	 on	 the	 damp	 ground,
their	stomachs	growling.	But	at	least	he	would	soon	see	his	birthplace	again	and,	few	as	his	forces	were,
have	the	chance	to	strike	at	Shaibani	Khan.

Babur’s	scouts	saw	it	first	–	smoke	rising	from	the	settlement	of	Tikand,	about	forty	miles	from	Akhsi.	He
remembered	the	village	well,	especially	his	hunting	trips	there	with	his	father	when	he	had	galloped	his
fat	little	pony	after	deer	across	its	meadows	of	white	clover	or	run	with	the	village	boys	to	flush	plump
pheasants	from	beds	of	mirtimuri	melons.	Tikand	had	been	a	pleasant,	prosperous	place,	its	fertile	soil
irrigated	by	a	network	of	canals.
But	this	was	a	very	different	Tikand.	Soon	Babur	himself	could	see	smoke	pouring	into	the	sky,	acrid
and	black.	This	was	no	dung	fire	lit	to	brew	tea	or	cook	the	midday	meal.	The	whole	settlement	must	be
burning.
As	 he	 and	 his	 men	 advanced,	 weapons	 ready,	 nothing	 stirred,	 not	 even	 a	 songbird.	 Ahead,	 a	 canal
gleamed	in	the	sunlight	but	around	it	the	neat	orchards	of	pear,	apple	and	almond	trees	were	a	wasteland.
Their	trunks	had	been	hacked	and	burned.	The	melon	patches,	too,	had	been	laid	waste.
But	there	was	worse.	One	tree	had	been	left	standing	–	a	handsome	apple	that	should	soon	have	been

pink	 and	 white	 with	 blossom	 in	 promise	 of	 a	 fine	 harvest	 of	 fruit.	 But	 it	 was	 already	 laden.	 From	 its
sturdy	branches	dangled	the	bodies	of	five	boys,	their	rough-cut	hair,	coarse-woven	tunics	and	leggings
exactly	 like	 those	 of	 the	 laughing,	 swearing,	 smooth-skinned	 urchins	 with	 whom	 he	 had	 once	 chased
pheasants.	 Except	 that	 their	 faces	 were	 swollen	 and	 purple,	 their	 eyes	 bursting	 from	 their	 sockets,	 and
their	 necks	 had	 bled	 where	 the	 coarse	 ropes	 had	 bitten	 into	 their	 young	 flesh.	 Flies	 buzzed	 round	 the
congealing	blood.	Babur	rode	up	to	touch	the	cheek	of	one	boy	as	his	body	swayed	slowly	to	and	fro.	His
skin	was	still	slightly	warm.
‘Cut	them	down.’
‘Majesty,	over	here.’	Baisanghar	was	pointing	at	a	nearby	well,	dug	to	hold	water	from	the	canal.
Dismounting,	Babur	peered	down	at	a	mangled	heap	of	bodies,	male	and	female.	From	what	he	could
see,	all	had	been	decapitated.	Fifty	feet	away,	arranged	in	a	neat	pile	like	a	display	of	melons	on	a	market
stall,	 were	 the	 heads.	 The	 uppermost	 belonged	 to	 an	 old	 man	 with	 a	 flowing	 white	 beard.	 Probably	 a
grandfather	if	not	a	great-grandfather.	His	severed	penis	was	protruding	bloodily	from	between	his	lips
and	his	testicles	occupied	his	eye	sockets.
Babur	 and	 his	 men	 rode	 on	 in	 silence	 towards	 the	 centre	 of	 Tikand.	 The	 Uzbek	 raiders	 had	 left	 a
smoking	shell,	the	barns	and	houses	burned	down.	Corpses	lay	everywhere,	some	stripped	and	arranged
in	obscene	postures	to	make	it	appear	as	if,	in	their	death	agony,	they	had	been	copulating.	The	Uzbeks
must	have	been	moving	too	quickly	to	carry	away	the	animals,	so	instead	they	had	mutilated	them,	slashing
their	tendons.	Babur	set	his	men	to	cut	the	throats	of	any	that	still	lived.
Half	an	hour	later,	as	they	were	finishing	their	grim	task,	one	of	his	scouts	–	a	soldier	whose	people
inhabited	 the	 lower	 slopes	 of	 the	 nearby	 mountain	 of	 Bara	 Koh	 and	 who	 knew	 the	 terrain	 well	 –	 came
galloping	in,	his	face	eager.
‘What	is	it?’
‘We’ve	picked	up	the	Uzbeks’	trail.	From	the	fresh	droppings	their	horses	left,	they	are	no	more	than
two	 hours	 ahead,	 and	 from	 their	 tracks	 they	 are	 heavily	 laden	 and	 moving	 slowly.	 They	 seem	 to	 be
heading	for	Akhsi.’
‘Good.	We	ride.’
Flanked	by	Baisanghar	and	Baburi,	Babur	set	off	after	the	scouts.	If	he	and	his	men	could	overtake	the
Uzbek	raiding	party	he	would	make	them	pay	–	drop	for	drop	of	blood,	scream	for	scream	–	for	what	they
had	done	here.	Those	boys,	hanged	as	casually	as	a	farmer	kills	crows,	would	be	avenged.
But	some	fifteen	miles	from	Tikand,	they	lost	the	trail	as	they	crossed	an	area	of	stony,	scrubby	ground.
Perhaps	 the	 Uzbeks	 had	 turned	 aside	 to	 raid	 some	 other	 village,	 but	 there	 was	 nowhere	 of	 any	 size
between	 Tikand	 and	 Akhsi.	 Babur	 decided	 to	 pause.	 If	 the	 Uzbeks	 had	 discovered	 they	 were	 being
followed,	he	and	his	men	might	be	riding	into	a	trap.	He	sent	two	scouts	ahead	and	another	four	to	circle
back,	two	to	the	left	and	two	to	the	right,	to	check	that	the	Uzbeks	were	not	about	to	fall	on	them	from	the
rear.
Babur	and	his	men	waited	in	silence,	eyes	and	ears	alert,	hands	tight	on	their	reins,	ready	to	take	off	in
a	moment	if	necessary.	It	was	some	time	before	one	of	the	advance	scouts	returned.
‘Majesty.	We’ve	found	them.	They’ve	ridden	into	the	forest.’
As	their	horses	picked	their	way	along	the	narrow	trail	the	Uzbeks	must	have	taken,	Babur	wondered
why	 they	 should	 have	 entered	 the	 dense,	 dark	 woods.	 It	 wasn’t	 the	 fastest	 route	 to	 Akhsi.	 Then	 he
remembered.	 Long	 ago,	 on	 one	 of	 those	 hunting	 expeditions	 that	 were	 now	 a	 distant	 memory,	 his	 father
had	shown	him	the	famous	Mirror	Rock	in	some	low	hills	to	the	north	of	the	forest.	The	great	boulder	had
amazed	him.	Nearly	thirty	feet	long,	and	in	some	places	as	high	as	a	man,	its	grey	surface	was	threaded
with	so	many	thick	veins	of	rock	crystal	that,	when	the	rays	of	the	midday	sun	fell	on	it,	it	shone	like	a

mirror,	reflecting	darts	of	bright	light.	It	was	supposed	to	have	mystical	powers	.	.	.	a	warrior	who	honed
the	blade	of	his	dagger	on	one	of	its	sharp	edges	would	never	fall	in	battle.	Perhaps	the	Uzbeks	–	now	that
their	murdering	was	done	–	wished	to	see	it	and	test	its	powers.
Half	an	hour	later,	Babur	and	his	men	emerged	into	open	pasture	where	they	could	again	see	the	tracks
of	horses	heading	north.	Drawing	Baisanghar	and	Baburi	to	his	side,	Babur	told	them	of	Mirror	Rock.	‘If
that	 is	 where	 the	 Uzbeks	 have	 gone,	 we	 may	 catch	 them	 off-guard.	 They	 will	 not	 expect	 to	 have	 been
followed.	But	we	must	be	cautious	.	.	.	If	I	remember	correctly,	the	rock	is	only	three	miles	from	here.	Tell
the	men	to	keep	silent	and	have	their	weapons	ready	.	.	.’
The	Uzbeks	were	shouting	and	laughing,	their	voices	rising	from	over	the	brow	of	a	low	hill	as	Babur
and	his	men	approached.	He	signalled	his	men	to	dismount	and,	leaving	half	a	dozen	soldiers	to	guard	the
horses,	led	the	rest	on	foot	up	the	slope	of	the	hill	from	behind	which	the	raucous	noises	were	coming.
Keeping	very	low,	they	peered	down.
It	was	nearly	midday	and	the	sunlight	reflecting	off	Mirror	Rock	was	so	dazzling	that	Babur	had	to	shut
his	 eyes.	 Even	 so,	 hot	 white	 spots	 danced	 beneath	 his	 eyelids.	 He	 had	 forgotten	 the	 rock’s	 brilliance.
Shading	his	eyes	with	his	hand,	he	looked	again.	The	Uzbeks	were	lolling	on	the	ground	beneath	the	rock.
Wineskins	–	some	empty,	some	still	full	–	lay	around	them.	So	did	their	weapons.	There	were	no	more
than	about	fifty	men.	Their	horses,	laden	with	spoils	from	Tikand,	were	tethered	beneath	a	clump	of	trees
to	the	right-hand	side	of	the	rock.
Sudden	high-pitched	screams	somewhere	over	to	his	left	made	Babur	swing	round.	Two	Uzbeks	were
dragging	 a	 half-naked	 woman	 by	 her	 arms	 to	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 rock.	 A	 chorus	 of	 further	 cries	 –	 high	 and
piercing	–	rose	from	behind	the	rock	where	the	Uzbeks	must	have	left	their	female	captives,	to	be	brought
out	and	enjoyed	at	their	leisure.
The	Uzbeks	stripped	the	screaming,	writhing	woman	of	her	robe,	exposing	her	soft,	pale	body.	Then,
while	one	knelt	and	pinioned	her	wrists,	two	others	each	held	one	of	her	spreadeagled	legs	and	a	fourth,
grinning,	began	to	loosen	his	belt.	Thoughts	of	Khanzada	flashed	through	Babur’s	brain.	He	leaped	to	his
feet	and	loosed	his	first	arrow.	The	man	was	still	fumbling	beneath	his	tunic	as	the	tip	pierced	his	throat.
With	a	ludicrous	expression	on	his	face	he	tumbled	backwards,	hand	clutching	his	genitals.
Babur’s	second	arrow	penetrated	the	left	eye	of	the	Uzbek	holding	the	woman’s	wrists	who,	on	seeing
what	 had	 happened	 to	 his	 comrade,	 had	 stupidly	 looked	 directly	 up	 the	 hill	 towards	 where	 Babur	 was
silhouetted	against	the	skyline.
With	a	cry	of	‘For	Ferghana!’	Babur	raced	down	the	hill,	his	men	around	him,	their	minds	set	on	bloody
revenge	for	the	inhabitants	of	Tikand.

‘We’ve	 left	 them	 a	 feast.’	 Baburi	 looked	 back	 at	 the	 circle	 of	 dark-winged	 birds	 wheeling	 in	 the	 air
currents	above	Mirror	Rock.
‘It	would	have	been	better	if	there’d	been	more,’	Babur	muttered.	Wiping	out	this	raiding	party	was	just
a	 fleabite.	 Shaibani	 Khan,	 his	 power	 and	 strength,	 lay	 ahead.	 Still,	 he	 had	 left	 a	 message:	 his	 name
scrawled	in	blood	on	a	scrap	of	paper	shoved	between	the	teeth	of	an	Uzbek.	Shaibani	Khan	would	soon
know	who	had	done	this.
‘But	we	didn’t	lose	a	single	man	and	we’ve	taken	all	their	horses	and	the	food	they	stole.’
Babur	glanced	at	the	lines	of	riderless	horses	at	the	rear	of	the	column.	The	seven	women	his	men	had
found	–	the	youngest	no	more	than	twelve	–	were	wrapped	in	cloaks	and	riding	in	two	donkey	carts	that

the	 Uzbeks	 had	 taken	 from	 Tikand	 to	 carry	 their	 booty.	 Before	 he	 went	 much	 further,	 he	 must	 get	 rid	 of
them.	There	was	a	small	settlement	east	of	here	where,	for	the	present	at	least,	the	women	would	be	safe.
He	would	send	them	there	with	an	escort.
Babur	rode	on	in	silence,	ignoring	Baburi’s	attempts	to	talk.	What	would	he	find	as	he	neared	Akhsi?
Would	 other	 chieftains	 rally	 to	 Jahangir?	 Would	 they	 reach	 him	 before	 Shaibani	 Khan’s	 troops	 arrived
before	the	gates?	More	than	ever	he	missed	Wazir	Khan’s	wisdom.	He,	too,	had	been	born	and	bred	in
Ferghana.	He	would	have	understood	Babur’s	torment.
With	darkness	falling,	they	camped	on	the	banks	of	a	stream	flowing	from	the	Jaxartes.	With	Akhsi	so
close	now	–	barely	two	hours’	ride	away	–	Babur	had	to	curb	the	desire	to	ride	on.	It	was	too	dangerous
to	blunder	about	in	the	dark.	Uzbek	patrols	might	be	anywhere.
He	 sat	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 stream,	 watching	 the	 water	 ripple	 past.	 He	 had	 been	 foolish.	 Rather	 than
hacking	 those	 Uzbeks	 to	 pieces	 at	 Mirror	 Rock,	 he	 should	 have	 questioned	 them,	 found	 out	 where
Shaibani	Khan	was,	the	size	of	his	force.	Instead,	bent	on	revenge,	he	had	been	intent	only	on	their	death.
He	still	had	much	to	learn	.	.	.
‘Majesty.	We	found	this	shepherd	nearby	with	his	flock.	You	must	hear	his	story.’
Babur	looked	round	to	see	Baisanghar	and	behind	him,	between	two	soldiers,	a	man	of	about	forty	with
a	weathered	face.	He	looked	nervous	but	that	was	hardly	surprising.	He	hadn’t	expected	to	be	grabbed
and	hauled	into	Babur’s	camp.
‘Repeat	what	you	told	my	men.	No	one	will	harm	you.’
Baisanghar	gripped	the	man’s	shoulders	and	turned	him	to	face	Babur.
The	 shepherd	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 ‘Shaibani	 Khan	 captured	 Akhsi	 five	 days	 ago.’	 His	 eyes	 flickered
anxiously	over	Babur’s	face.	‘They	say	he	tricked	King	Jahangir.	He	told	him	he	didn’t	want	Ferghana,
only	tribute.	If	the	king	would	acknowledge	him	publicly	as	his	overlord	and	pay	him	what	he	asked	he’d
take	his	army	back	to	Samarkand	.	.	.’
‘Go	on.’	Babur	felt	suddenly	cold.
‘I	wasn’t	there,	of	course.	So	I	can	only	tell	you	what	I	heard	.	.	.	They	say	the	ceremony	was	held	on
the	 banks	 of	 the	 Jaxartes	 below	 the	 fortress.	 Beneath	 a	 pavilion	 of	 red	 silk,	 the	 king	 knelt	 to	 Shaibani
Khan,	who	was	seated	on	a	divan	covered	with	gold	cloth,	and	called	him	“Master”.	As	he	waited,	head
bowed,	Shaibani	Khan	rose	and	drew	his	great	curved	sword.	Smiling,	he	advanced	on	the	king.	“Now
that	 you	 are	 my	 vassal	 I	 can	 do	 what	 I	 like	 with	 you,”	 he	 said,	 and	 hacked	 off	 his	 head.	 As	 he	 did	 so,
Shaibani	Khan’s	warriors	fell	on	the	king’s	courtiers	who	were	standing	at	either	side	and	murdered	them
too.’
‘Tambal?	Was	he	killed?	And	what	of	Baqi	Beg,	Yusuf	and	the	others?’
‘All	dead.	I	also	heard	–	from	two	stable-boys	who	escaped	from	Akhsi	–	that	when	Shaibani	Khan
entered	the	fortress	he	had	the	women	of	the	harem	paraded	before	him.	Some	he	gave	to	his	men,	others
he	took	for	himself.	Last	of	all	he	summoned	Roxanna,	the	king’s	mother.	They	say	he	held	up	her	son’s
severed	head	before	her	and,	as	she	wept,	wailed	and	cursed	him,	he	ordered	her	throat	to	be	cut	–	“to
silence	her	whining”,	he	said.’
Babur’s	 head	 was	 reeling.	 His	 informant	 hadn’t	 seen	 any	 of	 these	 things	 for	 himself	 and	 perhaps	 the
details	were	wrong,	but	Babur	didn’t	doubt	the	essence	of	the	story	–	that	Shaibani	Khan	had	tricked	and
killed	Jahangir	and	Tambal	and	had	taken	Ferghana	for	himself.	Neither	did	he	doubt	Roxanna’s	fate	and
for	a	moment	felt	a	fleeting	pity	for	his	father’s	concubine.
At	dawn,	after	a	restless	night,	Babur	untethered	his	horse	and	rode	alone	towards	a	steep	ridge	from
which	 he	 knew	 he	 could	 see	 Akhsi.	 His	 stallion	 was	 sweating	 as	 they	 breasted	 the	 summit.	 Far	 below,
with	the	Jaxartes	curling	past,	he	saw	the	fortress	built	by	his	ancestors,	their	stronghold	for	so	long.

A	 banner	 was	 streaming	 proudly	 above	 the	 gate.	 From	 this	 distance	 Babur	 couldn’t	 distinguish	 the
colour	but	he	knew	it	wasn’t	the	bright	yellow	of	Ferghana.	It	was	the	black	of	Shaibani	Khan,	who	had
stolen	 his	 ancestral	 lands	 just	 as	 he	 had	 seized	 Samarkand.	 Babur	 couldn’t	 hold	 back	 the	 tears	 that	 ran
down	his	face	or	control	the	sobs	that	shook	him.	But	it	didn’t	matter.	Up	here	on	the	mountain	ridge	there
was	no	one	to	see,	only	the	hawks	circling	high	above.

‘It	is	the	only	way.’	Esan	Dawlat’s	voice	was	insistent.	‘He	will	kill	you	just	as	he	murdered	Jahangir	and
your	cousin,	Mahmud	Khan.	He	has	sworn	to	exterminate	every	prince	of	Timur’s	house	and,	I	tell	you,	he
means	to	keep	his	oath.’
‘I	won’t	run	from	him.	I’m	no	coward	.	.	.’
‘Then	you	are	a	fool	instead.	He	commands	armies	of	thousands.	Over	the	summer,	since	he	captured
Samarkand	and	then	Ferghana,	the	tribes	of	the	northern	steppes	have	rallied	to	his	banner.	His	strength
increases	 daily	 while	 yours	 diminishes.’	 Esan	 Dawlat	 spat	 into	 the	 fire	 –	 something	 which	 Babur	 had
never	seen	her	do	before.	‘What	support	do	you	have?’	she	continued.	‘Fifty?	A	hundred?	The	rest	have
slunk	back	to	their	villages.	You	don’t	even	have	a	wife	.	.	.	or	an	heir.’
Esan	Dawlat	blamed	him	for	that,	but	he	was	glad	Ayisha	had	gone	for	good.	The	blunt	message	that
had	arrived	from	Ibrahim	Saru	that	he	had	never	intended	to	give	his	daughter	to	a	landless	pauper	and
that	 the	 marriage	 was	 dissolved	 had	 afforded	 Babur	 as	 much	 satisfaction	 as	 it	 had	 angered	 his
grandmother.	 According	 to	 the	 messenger	 who	 had	 delivered	 the	 letter	 –	 and	 returned	 the	 wedding
jewellery	Babur	had	given	her	–	the	talk	was	that	Ayisha	was	shortly	to	marry	a	man	of	her	own	tribe	to
whom	 she	 had	 been	 promised	 before	 Babur’s	 offer	 of	 marriage.	 At	 least	 Babur	 thought	 he	 might	 now
understand	the	reason	for	her	coldness	towards	him,	but	as	far	as	he	was	concerned	Ayisha	could	lie	in
another	man’s	bed	–	any	man	who	could	thaw	her	was	welcome.
‘I	have	no	time	for	a	wife,’	he	said	bluntly.	‘It	is	my	destiny	to	be	a	king	and	I	must	strike	back	.	.	.’
‘If	you	truly	believe	in	your	destiny	you	will	listen.	Even	now,	Shaibani	Khan	is	searching	for	you.	He
knows	it	was	you	who	ambushed	his	men	at	Mirror	Rock,	and	by	now	he	will	know,	too,	that	you	have
returned	here	to	Sayram.	Many	will	be	willing	to	take	his	gold	for	betraying	you.’
‘I	made	a	promise	to	Khanzada	.	.	.’
‘Which	you	cannot	honour	if	he	cuts	your	head	off	your	shoulders.	And	will	it	ease	her	suffering	when
Shaibani	Khan	tells	her	you	are	dead?’	Her	face	softened	when	she	saw	the	bitterness	in	his	eyes.	‘You
are	still	so	young.	You	must	learn	to	be	patient.	When	you	live	as	long	as	I,	you	learn	that	circumstances
change.	Sometimes	the	bravest	thing	–	and	the	hardest	–	is	to	wait.’
Kutlugh	Nigar	nodded.	Since	Khanzada	had	been	taken	she	had	became	so	silent	it	was	hard	to	coax	a
word	from	her.	‘Your	grandmother	is	right.	You	have	no	chance	if	you	stay	here.	He	will	murder	us	all.	I
do	not	care	for	myself,	but	you	must	survive	.	.	.	Remember	whose	blood	flows	in	your	veins.	Don’t	let
Shaibani	Khan	wipe	you	out	like	some	petty	bandit.’
Kutlugh	Nigar	wrapped	her	thick	dark	blue	shawl	round	herself	more	tightly	and	held	her	hands	over
the	brazier	in	the	hearth.	Winter	would	soon	be	upon	them	again,	as	the	winds	blowing	around	Sayram’s
mud-brick	houses	and	penetrating	the	wooden	shutters	were	warning	them.
Babur	kissed	her	thin	cheek.	‘I	will	think	over	what	you	have	both	said.’
Esan	Dawlat	picked	up	her	lute.	It	was	battered	and	some	of	the	mother-of-pearl,	inlaid	to	resemble
clusters	of	narcissi,	had	fallen	out,	but	as	she	plucked	the	strings	the	soft,	sweet	notes	carried	Babur	back

to	the	days	of	his	boyhood	in	Akhsi.
Going	outside,	he	walked	across	the	courtyard,	climbed	on	to	the	village	wall	and	stared	out	into	the
gathering	dusk.	He	would	make	his	own	decisions,	but	he	knew	his	grandmother	and	mother	were	right.
His	priority	must	be	to	stay	alive.
‘Majesty.’	He	heard	Baburi’s	voice	from	below	him.	A	trio	of	plump	pigeons	dangled	by	their	feet	from
his	 belt	 –	 he	 must	 have	 been	 hunting.	 He	 climbed	 the	 short	 flight	 of	 steps	 on	 to	 the	 wall	 and	 stood	 in
silence	at	Babur’s	side.
‘Do	you	ever	doubt	your	destiny,	Baburi?’
‘Market	boys	don’t	have	destinies.	They’re	a	luxury,	for	kings.’
‘All	my	life	I’ve	been	told	that	I	was	put	on	this	earth	to	achieve	something.	What	if	it	isn’t	true	.	.	.	?’
‘What	do	you	want	me	to	tell	you?	That	you	are	heir	to	Genghis	Khan	and	Timur?	That	life	should	be
good	to	you	as	of	right?’
Baburi’s	 tone	 was	 impatient;	 rough,	 even.	 Babur	 had	 never	 heard	 him	 speak	 like	 that	 before.	 ‘I	 have
been	unlucky.’
‘No	 you	 haven’t.	 You	 were	 fortunate	 in	 your	 birth.	 You	 had	 everything.	 You	 weren’t	 an	 orphan.	 You
didn’t	have	to	fight	for	scraps	like	me.’	Suddenly	anger	blazed	in	Baburi’s	indigo	eyes.	‘I’ve	watched	you
since	we	rode	back	here	from	Akhsi,	drowning	in	self-pity,	hardly	speaking	to	those	around	you.	You’ve
changed.	You	weren’t	like	this	when	we	went	riding	together	or	when	you	had	Yadgar	in	your	arms.	That
was	living	and	you’ve	forgotten	what	it	was	like.	If	this	is	how	you	behave	in	adversity,	perhaps	you	don’t
deserve	this	“great	destiny”	–	whatever	it	might	be	–	that	you	seem	to	carry	around	like	a	burden	on	your
back.’
Before	he	knew	it,	Babur	had	taken	a	swing	at	Baburi	and	the	two	had	tumbled	from	the	walls	on	to	the
hard	 mud	 below.	 Babur	 was	 the	 heavier	 and	 had	 Baburi	 pinned	 under	 him	 but,	 quick	 as	 an	 eel,	 Baburi
twisted	to	one	side	and,	with	the	fingers	of	one	hand	poking	into	one	of	Babur’s	eyes,	caught	him	a	hard
blow	with	the	other	on	the	side	of	his	head.	Grunting	with	pain,	Babur	rolled	off	him,	sprang	to	his	feet
and	leaped	on	him	again,	winding	him.	Seizing	Baburi’s	head	he	began	banging	it	hard	against	the	ground,
but	a	second	later	felt	Baburi’s	boot	in	his	groin.	In	agony,	he	let	go	of	Baburi	and	rolled	aside.
The	 two	 of	 them	 –	 hair	 dusty	 and	 tousled	 –	 looked	 at	 one	 another.	 Baburi’s	 nose	 was	 bleeding	 and
Babur	felt	blood	running	down	his	own	face	from	a	cut	above	his	ear,	while	his	left	eye,	where	Baburi
had	jabbed	it,	was	already	hard	to	keep	open.
‘You’d	make	a	good	street-fighter,’	Baburi	said.	‘You’ll	never	starve	–	destiny	or	no	destiny.’
As	men,	alerted	by	the	sound	of	their	fight,	came	running	along	the	walls	above	them,	led	by	an	amazedlooking	Baisanghar,	the	two	of	them	started	to	laugh.

The	air	was	so	cold	it	stung	Babur’s	eyes.	Every	two	or	three	steps	his	feet,	in	their	hide	boots,	slipped
on	 the	 ice.	 Yet	 this	 steep	 pass,	 leading	 south	 out	 of	 Ferghana,	 was	 the	 only	 viable	 escape	 route	 from
Shaibani	Khan	whose	patrols	had	been	hunting	Babur	and	his	men	like	foxes,	flushing	them	from	place	to
place	and	laying	everywhere	waste.
The	absence	of	horses	or	ponies	made	Babur	feel	vulnerable,	even	high	on	this	icy	mountain	where	they
would	meet	no	one.	He	and	his	people	had	always	been	horsemen	but	for	the	moment	they	must	rely	on	the
endurance	of	their	own	bodies.	During	the	first	few	days	of	the	journey	up	the	lower	slopes,	Esan	Dawlat
and	Kutlugh	Nigar	had	ridden	on	the	backs	of	one	of	the	four	donkeys	Babur	had	brought	with	him	to	help

carry	their	possessions.	But	as	the	ascent	got	steeper	and	the	weather	worsened,	Babur	had	had	to	order
the	animals	killed	for	food.
Thereafter,	it	had	sometimes	been	possible	for	Esan	Dawlat	and	Kutlugh	Nigar	to	be	carried	in	baskets
on	the	backs	of	his	strongest	men.	But	for	the	rest	of	the	time,	they	and	their	two	serving	women,	like	the
forty	or	so	men	who	remained	with	Babur,	had	had	to	walk,	feeling	their	way	upwards	through	the	frozen
rocks	 with	 their	 wooden	 staves.	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 had	 surprised	 her	 son	 with	 her	 agility	 and	 balance,
refusing	help	in	favour	of	her	own	weaker	mother.	Babur	could	see	her	now,	ahead	of	him,	so	muffled	in
sheepskins	that	almost	nothing	of	her	was	visible,	pulling	herself	up	the	rocks	quicker	than	some	of	his
men.	She	was	faring	much	better	than	Kasim,	who	had	fallen	repeatedly	and	was	clearly	exhausted.
All	that	the	party	had	to	shelter	them	were	four	felt	tents	and	some	fleeces	rolled	together	round	poles
that	 three	 men	 –	 one	 behind	 another	 with	 the	 pole	 resting	 on	 their	 shoulders	 –	 could	 just	 about	 carry.
Babur	had	taken	his	turn,	his	back	bending	as	his	feet	fought	for	purchase.
After	another	day,	they	should	be	over	the	pass.	In	the	valleys	below	there	would	be	villages	to	provide
them	with	shelter	and	later	with	horses.	That	night,	lying	beneath	the	fleeces,	Babur	took	comfort	from	that
thought,	 as	 he	 did	 from	 the	 companionable	 warmth	 of	 the	 bodies	 of	 Baburi	 and	 his	 men	 pressed	 tightly
around	him.

Caught	urinating	on	the	ice	of	a	frozen	stream,	the	boy	gawped	in	amazement	two	days	later	at	the	unkempt
party	 stumbling	 towards	 him	 from	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 pass.	 Then	 he	 turned	 and	 fled,	 slipping	 and
slithering	to	the	village	a	few	hundred	yards	further	downhill.
‘Shall	I	send	men	ahead,	Majesty?’	Baisanghar	asked.
Babur	nodded.	Though	he	was	numb	with	cold,	relief	and	pride	began	to	pump	through	him,	reviving
him.	He	had	done	it.	He	had	brought	his	family	and	his	men	safely	through	the	mountains.	That	they	were	a
ragged	few,	rather	than	the	armies	he	had	once	commanded,	didn’t	matter	for	the	present.
A	 few	 minutes	 later,	 Baisanghar’s	 soldiers	 returned	 with	 what	 looked	 –	 beneath	 the	 layers	 of	 thick
quilted	coats	and	the	dark	woollen	cloth	wound	round	his	head	–	like	an	elderly	man.	They	must	have	told
him	who	Babur	was	for	he	fell	at	his	feet,	touching	his	forehead	to	the	cold	snow.
‘There’s	 no	 need	 for	 that.’	 It	 was	 a	 long	 time	 since	 Babur	 had	 received	 such	 obeisance.	 He	 took	 the
man	by	the	shoulders	and	helped	him	gently	to	his	feet.	‘We	are	weary	and	have	come	far.	And	we	have
women	with	us.	Will	you	give	us	shelter?’
‘Few	cross	the	mountains	so	late	in	the	year,’	the	man	said.	‘I	am	the	headman	here.	You	are	welcome
in	our	village.’
That	night,	Babur	sat	cross-legged	by	the	fire	in	the	headman’s	simple,	mud-walled	house.	The	lower
floor	 was	 a	 single	 room	 with	 bolsters	 of	 wool	 to	 sleep	 on	 –	 Esan	 Dawlat,	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 and	 the
headman’s	wife	were	sharing	a	small	room	above,	reached	by	a	flight	of	wooden	stairs	outside.	Baburi
was	next	to	him,	and	both	were	examining	the	black	marks	and	blisters	on	their	feet	left	by	frostbite.
‘Sometimes	 I	 thought	 I’d	 never	 walk	 again	 –	 even	 if	 we	 survived.’	 Baburi	 winced	 as	 he	 touched	 a
tender	spot.
‘We	were	lucky.	We	could	easily	have	lost	our	way	or	fallen	down	a	ravine.’
‘Was	it	luck	or	that	mighty	“destiny”	of	yours?’	Baburi	smiled.	Babur	also	smiled	but	made	no	reply.

Despite	the	early-morning	mist,	Babur	saw	the	hare	as	it	jumped	out	from	behind	a	low	bush	then	froze,
ears	erect,	to	snuff	the	air.	He	was	downwind	of	it	–	the	hare	couldn’t	know	he	was	there.	Carefully	he	put
an	arrow	to	his	bow-string	and	pulled	it	back,	eyes	never	leaving	the	animal	that,	satisfied	it	was	safe,
was	enjoying	a	brisk	scratch.
Suddenly	behind	Babur	came	the	sound	of	running	feet	and	the	hare	took	off.	Cursing,	he	turned	to	see
one	of	his	men,	agitated	and	panting.	‘Majesty,	an	ambassador	has	come	from	Kabul.	He	has	been	seeking
you	for	the	past	two	months,	ever	since	the	snows	began	to	melt.	He	is	waiting	in	the	headman’s	house.’
Irritation	forgotten,	Babur	secured	his	quiver,	slung	his	bow	over	his	shoulder	and	ran	down	the	track
towards	the	village.	The	message	must	be	from	his	father’s	cousin,	the	King	of	Kabul	.	.	.	but	the	two	men
had	been	estranged	and	there	had	been	little	contact	between	them	that	Babur	could	recall.
The	ambassador,	wearing	a	peacock	blue	robe,	was	more	grandly	dressed	than	anyone	Babur	had	seen
in	a	long	time.	Feathers,	held	by	a	jewelled	clasp,	waved	from	the	crest	of	his	dark	blue	turban	and	his
two	attendants	were	clad	in	blue	trimmed	with	gold.	They	must	have	changed	while	they	were	waiting	for
his	men	to	find	him.	Babur	smiled	inwardly.	No	one	would	ride	about	the	mountains	in	such	garb	.	.	.	All
the	 same,	 he	 was	 conscious	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 many	 months	 of	 his	 own	 appearance	 –	 his	 long	 hair,
simple	yellow	wool	tunic	and	buckskin	trousers.
But	the	ambassador	didn’t	seem	perturbed.	Relief	that	his	search	was	over	was	written	in	his	features
as	Babur	strode	towards	him.
The	ambassador	bowed	low.	‘Greetings,	Majesty.’
‘You	are	welcome.	They	tell	me	you	come	from	Kabul.	What	do	you	want	of	me?’
‘Majesty,	 I	 bring	 news	 that	 is	 sad	 but	 also	 glorious.	 The	 king,	 your	 father’s	 cousin,	 Ulughbeg	 Mirza,
died	 during	 the	 winter	 leaving	 no	 heir.	 His	 last	 surviving	 son	 had	 already	 died	 of	 a	 fever	 two	 months
before.	My	message	from	the	Royal	Council	of	Kabul	is	this.	The	throne	can	be	yours	if	you	will	come.
The	 council	 believes	 the	 inhabitants	 will	 welcome	 another	 ruler	 from	 Timur’s	 illustrious	 stock,
particularly	one	proven	in	battle	and	still	young.	With	the	council’s	support,	which	they	pledge	you	on	the
Holy	Book,	you	will	have	no	rivals.’
Babur	could	not	hide	his	surprise.	Never	in	his	wildest	and	most	desperate	moments	had	he	thought	of
the	kingdom	of	Kabul.	It	was	so	far	away	–	more	than	five	hundred	miles.	To	reach	it	he	must	cross	the
broad	Oxus	and	the	twisting,	knife-sharp	passes	of	the	Hindu	Kush.	Even	then	it	would	be	a	gamble.	By
the	 time	 he	 arrived	 much	 might	 have	 changed.	 The	 members	 of	 the	 royal	 council	 who,	 for	 whatever
reason,	seemed	so	generously	disposed	towards	him	might	have	been	toppled	or	bribed	to	support	another
candidate.
Yet	 he	 couldn’t	 stay	 here,	 hunting	 rabbits	 and	 hares,	 as	 another	 year	 passed	 him	 by	 and	 also,	 Babur
thought,	 with	 growing	 elation	 and	 excitement,	 Kabul	 was	 far	 from	 the	 rapacious	 Shaibani	 Khan.	 It	 was
also	rich	and	powerful.	Soldiers	would	flock	to	him	again.	There,	he	could	rebuild	his	power	and	plan	his
next	move.
‘Thank	you,’	he	said,	to	the	messenger.	‘I	will	give	you	my	answer	in	a	short	while.’	But	he	already
knew.	He	was	going	to	Kabul.

	
	
	

Chapter	14
A	Sign	of	Fortune
	
‘

You	 followed	 me	 far	 from	 your	 homes,	 braving	 danger	 and	 hardship	 out	 of	 loyalty	 to	 me	 and	 your

hatred	of	our	blood	enemy,	the	barbarous	Uzbeks.	I	led	you	over	high	mountains	and	through	icy	passes.
Our	bodies	warmed	each	other	in	our	tents	at	night	as	the	winds	tried	to	blow	us	to	oblivion.	We	shared
our	meagre	food	equally.	Never	in	the	nine	years	since	I	became	a	king	have	I	felt	so	proud.	You	may	be
few	in	number	but	you	have	the	tiger’s	spirit.’	Babur’s	green	eyes	glinted	as	he	looked	round	the	circle	of
faces	 before	 him.	 His	 men	 were	 so	 few	 that	 he	 knew	 each	 by	 name,	 his	 clan,	 where	 he	 had	 earned	 his
scars.	He	had	spoken	only	the	truth.	He	was	proud	of	his	ragged	little	army.
‘Soon	 I	 will	 be	 able	 to	 reward	 your	 devotion.	 My	 father’s	 cousin,	 the	 King	 of	 Kabul,	 has	 died.
Respecting	 both	 my	 royal	 lineage	 and	 the	 reputation	 I	 have	 –	 with	 your	 help	 –	 built	 as	 a	 courageous,
undaunted	 leader,	 the	 people	 of	 Kabul	 have	 chosen	 me	 as	 their	 new	 ruler,	 if	 I	 will	 come.	 And	 I	 will	 –
even	if	I	have	to	go	alone.	But	I	know	that	you	will	trust	me	once	more	and	come	with	me.	But,	more	than
this,	will	you	send	word	to	your	villages	so	that	others	may	join	us	to	share	in	our	good	fortune	and	fulfil
the	destiny	that	is	the	birthright	of	us	all?’	Babur	raised	his	arms	as	if	he	was	already	celebrating	a	great
triumph.
From	all	around	a	mighty	cheer	arose.	Who	would	have	thought	that	just	a	few	dozen	voices	could	raise
such	a	sound?	Babur	glanced	at	Baburi,	Baisanghar	and	Kasim	beside	him,	roaring	with	the	rest.	A	fresh
energy	was	rising	inside	him	.	.	.

A	month	later	Babur	was	in	his	tent,	the	flaps	thrown	open	to	the	sun	and	the	fresh,	warm	breeze.	Word	of
his	 changed	 fortunes	 had	 carried	 swiftly,	 as	 he	 had	 hoped.	 The	 ragged	 party	 he	 had	 led	 from	 Ferghana
now	numbered	more	than	four	thousand	warriors	from	Mongol	nomads	whose	chiefs	tied	the	tugh,	or	yaktail	 standard,	 to	 the	 tails	 of	 their	 horses	 in	 battle,	 to	 Timurid	 chiefs	 displaced	 by	 Shaibani	 Khan.	 He
wasn’t	naïve	enough	to	believe	that	many	felt	any	great	loyalty	to	him	or	his	cause:	they	were	with	him	for
reward.	 But	 their	 readiness	 to	 undertake	 such	 a	 long,	 hazardous	 journey	 showed	 a	 pleasing	 confidence
that	he	would	succeed.	His	reputation	had	spoken	for	him.
Babur	 had	 already	 put	 the	 gold	 the	 ambassador	 had	 brought	 from	 the	 royal	 council	 in	 Kabul	 to	 good
use,	buying	weapons,	strong	horses,	herds	of	fat	sheep	and	tents	of	supple	hides	lined	with	felt	that	kept
out	the	draughts.	He	and	his	army	had	crossed	the	smooth,	broad	Oxus	with	ease,	loading	horses,	packmules,	camels	and	baggage	carts	on	to	the	flat-ended,	shallow-draughted	boats	that	the	skilful	rivermen
had,	over	two	days	and	nights,	ferried	to	and	fro,	digging	their	long	wooden	poles	into	the	sandy	riverbed
to	propel	their	craft.	Some	of	these	boatmen	–	impressed	by	the	size	of	Babur’s	army	–	had	thrown	aside
their	poles	and	joined	him.
His	 advance	 south-west	 had	 begun	 to	 feel	 like	 a	 triumphal	 procession	 but	 he	 must	 not	 became
complacent.	Though	Shaibani	Khan	and	his	forces	were	far	behind,	Babur	knew	from	the	accounts	he	had

studied	of	Timur’s	expeditions	and	from	the	stories	of	the	old	woman,	Rehana,	that	many	dangers	lurked
among	the	frozen	peaks	of	the	Hindu	Kush,	which	lay	between	him	and	Kabul.	He	was	glad	he	had	left	his
mother	and	grandmother,	with	soldiers	to	protect	them,	behind	the	sturdy	walls	of	the	fortress	of	Kishm,
given	to	him	by	one	of	his	new	allies.	Once	he	had	taken	Kabul	he	would	send	for	them,	but	until	then	they
would	 be	 safe.	 He	 wished	 the	 same	 was	 true	 of	 Khanzada,	 whose	 anguished	 face	 he	 often	 saw	 in	 his
dreams.
‘Majesty.’	A	bodyguard	entered	his	tent.	‘Your	council	is	waiting.’
It	felt	odd	to	have	a	council	of	advisers	again.	They	were	assembled	beneath	the	spreading	branches	of
a	 plane	 tree	 –	 Kasim	 in	 a	 long	 green	 quilted	 robe,	 Baisanghar	 and	 Baburi	 in	 new	 tunics	 of	 fine-woven
wool,	but	also	Hussain	Mazid,	who	had	come	from	Sayram	with	fifty	men,	and	three	others.	Two	were
Mongol	chieftains	with	round	hats	of	black	sheepskin,	their	broad	faces	shiny	with	battle	scars.	The	third
was	a	distant	cousin	of	Babur’s,	Mirza	Khan,	a	fleshy,	middle-aged	man	with	a	cast	in	his	left	eye,	who
had	been	pushed	out	of	his	own	lands	by	the	Uzbeks’	advance	and	had	brought	Babur	three	hundred	wellequipped	cavalrymen,	extra	horses	and	wagonloads	of	grain.	Babur	had	no	very	high	opinion	of	his	brains
or	his	valour	–	his	status	and	wealth	had	won	him	his	place.
Signalling	to	his	council	to	sit	on	the	carpets	laid	on	the	ground,	he	went	straight	to	the	point:	‘We	still
have	nearly	two	hundred	miles	to	go	to	reach	Kabul.	Between	us	and	the	city	lies	the	Hindu	Kush.	None	of
us	has	ever	seen	those	mountains,	let	alone	crossed	them.	We	know	them	only	in	our	imaginations	but	they
will	be	formidable,	even	in	summer	.	.	.	The	question	is,	do	we	cross	them	or	do	we	seek	another	way	.	.	.
?’
‘What	alternative	is	there?’	asked	Mirza	Khan.
‘We	 could	 avoid	 the	 worst	 of	 the	 mountains	 by	 circling	 round,	 along	 the	 river	 valleys,	 as	 the
ambassador	did	when	he	came	seeking	me	.	.	.’
‘But	that	would	take	a	long	time	–	perhaps	too	long,’	said	Baburi.	‘Delay	could	be	a	much	greater	risk
to	us	than	the	mountains	.	.	.’
Baisanghar	nodded.	‘I	agree.	We	should	cross	the	mountains.	But	to	do	so	we’ll	need	guides,	men	who
know	the	passes	and	can	lead	us	over	them	by	the	best	and	safest	route.	Men	we	can	trust	.	.	.’
The	Mongol	chiefs	were	looking	impassive	as	though	a	journey	over	the	roof	of	the	world	was	nothing
to	them.	Babur	had	the	feeling	that	if	they	believed	the	booty	would	be	great	enough,	they’d	follow	him
into	the	furnaces	of	hell	–	but	if	disappointed	in	their	hopes	of	bounty	would	leave	him	there	.	.	.
Babur	looked	around	at	his	council	once	more.	There	seemed	no	point	in	deliberating	any	longer.	He
had	gone	over	it	again	and	again	in	his	mind	and	each	time	his	conclusion	had	been	the	same.	If	he	wanted
Kabul	he	must	be	quick.
‘Very	well.	I	have	decided.	We	go	over	the	Hindu	Kush.	As	we	near	the	mountains,	we’ll	look	for	men
to	guide	us	–	but	if	we	cannot	find	them	we	go	anyway	.	.	.	We	will	ride	out	in	thirty-six	hours.	Use	that
time	to	check	your	men’s	equipment	and	provisions,	and	the	condition	of	your	animals.	Baisanghar,	I	rely
on	you	to	tell	the	other	chieftains.	And	we	take	only	our	horses	and	pack-mules,	no	livestock,	not	even
into	the	foothills.’

The	 rows	 of	 ragged,	 jagged	 peaks	 were	 getting	 closer.	 Sometimes	 Babur	 imagined	 he	 could	 feel	 their
frozen	 breath	 on	 his	 face.	 The	 lower	 slopes	 rose	 in	 dark	 green	 ripples	 but,	 high	 above,	 the	 icy	 tips
gleamed	diamond	bright.	Some	called	these	mountains	the	Stony	Girdles	of	the	Earth,	but	to	Babur	they

were	 more	 like	 towers	 of	 crystal.	 Old	 Rehana’s	 tales	 of	 Timur	 being	 hoisted	 down	 a	 cliff	 face,	 of	 his
frozen,	starving	warriors,	of	terrified	horses	slipping	and	sliding	on	the	ice	and	of	attacks	by	wild	Kafirs
were	still	vivid	in	his	mind.	Bringing	his	own	family	and	his	few	men	through	the	southern	mountains	out
of	Ferghana	safely	eight	months	previously	had	been	nothing	compared	with	leading	an	entire	army	and	all
its	equipment	across	these	high	peaks,	which	–	so	the	legends	said	–	touched	the	skies.
‘What	are	you	thinking?’	Baburi	was	beside	him	on	a	bay	mare	that	kept	tossing	her	head	to	rid	herself
of	a	buzzing	horsefly
‘What	Rehana	told	us	of	how	Timur	brought	his	army	over	the	Hindu	Kush	to	Delhi	.	.	.’
Baburi	shrugged.	‘They	were	vivid	stories,	romantic	and	much	embroidered.	To	her	every	word	was
true	but	I	wasn’t	sure	how	much	of	it	was	real.	Take	that	story	of	her	grandfather	saving	the	boy	who	gave
him	the	golden	elephant	–	I	bet	he	looted	it,	and	made	up	the	rescue	to	compensate	for	having	abandoned
the	other	boy.	Anyway,	soon	we’ll	see	for	ourselves	what	it’s	like	up	there.	At	least	we	have	a	man	to
guide	us.’
‘I	hope	he	was	telling	the	truth	when	he	said	he	knew	the	mountains.’
‘Your	promise	to	throw	him	down	a	crevasse	if	he’d	lied	seemed	effective.’
‘I	meant	it.’
Babur	looked	over	his	shoulder	at	his	bodyguard	and,	beyond,	the	long	lines	of	riders	advancing	across
a	 dry	 landscape	 that	 shimmered	 in	 the	 August	 heat.	 Sweat	 dripped	 from	 his	 forehead	 and	 was	 running
down	between	his	shoulder-blades.	He	drank	some	water	from	the	leather	water-bottle	dangling	from	his
saddle.	It	was	strange	to	think	they’d	soon	enter	a	world	of	snow	and	ice.
‘What’s	 Kabul	 like?’	 Baburi	 took	 a	 swipe	 at	 the	 horsefly	 with	 one	 of	 his	 gauntlets	 and	 grunted	 in
satisfaction	to	see	it	fall	lifeless	to	the	hard-baked	ground.
‘My	father	never	went	there	but	he	said	he’d	heard	it	was	a	strange	place	caught	between	two	worlds	–
one	hot,	the	other	cold.	Within	a	day’s	ride	of	Kabul	is	a	place	where	the	snow	never	falls,	but	two	hours
in	another	direction	takes	you	to	where	the	snow	never	melts	.	.	.’
‘I	wonder	about	the	girls	.	.	.’
‘Whether	they’re	hot	or	cold?	If	we’re	lucky	we’ll	find	out.’

The	air	was	thin.	Babur	was	finding	it	hard	to	breathe	and	his	heart	was	beating	faster	than	normal.	The
horses,	 too,	 were	 feeling	 the	 strain,	 snorting	 with	 effort	 as	 they	 climbed.	 With	 frozen	 fingers,	 Babur
yanked	 the	 fur-lined	 hood	 of	 his	 cloak	 further	 over	 his	 head.	 An	 hour	 ago,	 the	 sky	 had	 been	 clear	 but
suddenly,	without	warning,	snow	had	begun	to	fall.	Now	thick,	white	flakes	whirled	dizzily	round	them.
Looking	 back,	 Babur	 could	 barely	 make	 out	 the	 dark	 shapes	 of	 men	 and	 beasts	 plodding	 in	 a	 long	 line
behind,	 a	 few	 men	 still	 riding	 but	 many	 more,	 like	 him,	 leading	 their	 animals	 up	 the	 steep,	 icy	 slopes,
heads	 bowed	 against	 the	 storm.	 His	 own	 horse,	 a	 grey	 with	 a	 dark	 mane	 and	 tail,	 was	 whinnying	 in
discomfort	and	protest	as	Babur	tugged	at	its	bridle.
He	 was	 well	 accustomed	 to	 bitter	 winters,	 but	 the	 suddenness	 of	 this	 summer	 blizzard,	 carried	 on	 a
freezing,	scouring	wind,	seemed	a	warning.	Through	the	crazily	dancing	snowflakes	he	imagined	he	could
see	 the	 shadowy	 figures	 of	 Timur’s	 warriors	 battling	 their	 way	 upwards.	 The	 thought	 that	 they	 had
endured	and	survived	gave	him	strength.
‘Majesty,’	Babur	recognised	Baisanghar’s	voice	close	by	him,	‘the	guide	says	it	is	too	dangerous	to	go
on	when	we	cannot	see	in	front	of	our	noses.	He	knows	of	a	khawal	–	a	cave	in	the	rocks	–	a	few	hundred

yards	further	on.	He	urges	you	to	take	refuge	there	until	the	storm	passes	and	he	will	show	the	rest	of	us
how	best	to	protect	ourselves	and	the	animals.’
Babur	shook	his	head.	‘If	the	guide	says	we	should	stop,	we	will	stop,’	he	said,	‘but	I	won’t	skulk	in	a
cave	while	my	men	face	discomfort	and	hardship	outside.	What	does	he	say	we	must	do?’
‘Dig,	 Majesty.	 We	 cannot	 pitch	 our	 tents	 in	 these	 winds	 so	 we	 must	 burrow	 holes	 for	 ourselves	 and
make	windbreaks	of	snow	to	protect	our	animals	and	wait	for	the	blizzard	to	ease	.	.	.’
‘Very	well.	Give	me	a	shovel	.	.	.’
Early	the	next	morning,	Babur	woke	in	his	snowhole.	A	layer	of	snow	was	covering	his	body	but	he
was	surprised	by	how	well	he	had	slept	in	his	cocoon	of	blankets.	Crawling	out	and	dusting	the	snow	off,
he	saw	to	his	relief	that	all	was	again	calm.	The	white	landscape	glittered	beneath	a	bright,	clear	blue	sky.
‘Majesty.’	It	was	the	guide,	a	tall	sturdy	man	of	about	thirty-five,	well	bundled	against	the	cold.	His	son
–	 a	 boy	 of	 fourteen	 or	 fifteen	 –	 was	 beside	 him,	 arms	 crossed	 and	 mittened	 hands	 tucked	 beneath	 his
armpits	for	added	warmth.
‘Can	we	go	on?’
‘Yes,	but	we	must	be	especially	careful	now.	The	snow	conceals	many	dangers	that	before	would	have
been	obvious.’
The	man	was	right.	The	thick	crusting	of	snow	made	the	landscape	appear	softer	and	more	benign	but	it
had	 formed	 bridges	 over	 crevasses.	 As	 the	 party	 set	 off,	 Babur	 watched	 how	 the	 guide,	 walking
cautiously	ahead,	now	and	then	thrust	his	long	stick	into	apparently	solid	ground	that	at	once	collapsed	to
reveal	a	deep	ravine	from	which	there	could	be	no	rescue.	When	Babur	asked	how	he	had	acquired	his
knowledge,	the	man	said	that	for	centuries	his	family	had	guided	travellers	over	these	mountains.	Was	it
fanciful	to	wonder	whether	one	of	his	ancestors	had	been	with	Timur’s	army?
Soon	there	was	no	time	or	energy	for	idle	speculation.	As	they	inched	higher	on	to	a	curving	saddle	of
land	between	two	peaks,	the	snow	was	growing	deeper	so	that	the	horses	were	sinking	to	their	stirrups,
even	their	girths	.	.	.
‘Majesty	 .	 .	 .	 I	 must	 have	 snow-tramplers.’	 The	 guide	 was	 immersed	 almost	 to	 his	 waist	 in	 the	 soft,
dense	mass.
‘What	.	.	.	?’
‘Snow-tramplers	.	.	.	We’re	past	the	area	where	we	must	worry	about	ravines.	Now	I	need	fifteen	to
twenty	strong	men.	The	lead	man	must	force	a	channel	through	the	snow	so	that	those	behind	can	beat	the
snow	down	further	and	create	a	path	for	the	rest	of	the	men	and	animals	following	behind.	It	is	the	only
way	we	will	ever	reach	the	pass	.	.	.’
An	hour	later,	Babur’s	lungs	were	burning	and	his	legs	felt	ready	to	buckle	beneath	him.	Yet	he,	above
all	 others,	 must	 show	 stamina	 and	 fortitude.	 He	 had	 insisted	 on	 taking	 his	 turn	 as	 lead	 man	 and	 where
others	had	cleared	perhaps	eight	to	ten	yards	before	giving	up	exhausted,	he	was	determined	to	manage
double	that	.	.	.	Sweat	poured	off	him,	despite	the	cold,	but	every	step	brought	grim	satisfaction	that	not
even	Nature	herself	could	stand	in	his	way.
By	mid-afternoon	they	were	finally	clear	of	the	snowfields	and	on	higher,	firmer	ground.	Unlike	Timur,
he	and	his	men	had	been	fortunate.	The	snows	had	not	returned	and	they	were	now	making	steady	progress
through	this	hostile	but	still	beautiful	world.	Babur	had	always	thought	of	ice	as	white,	but	here,	on	the
ceiling	of	the	world,	it	shone	azure	and	turquoise	in	the	warm	sunlight.
‘How	much	longer	to	the	pass?’
The	guide	thought	for	a	moment.	‘If	we	continue	at	this	pace	we	should	reach	the	Hupian	Pass	before
nightfall	tomorrow,	Majesty.’
Babur	clapped	his	hands,	frozen	despite	the	woollen	cloth	he	had	bound	tightly	around	them	and	his	fur-

lined	gauntlets,	and	winced	at	what	felt	like	the	pricking	of	red-hot	needles	as	his	blood	flowed	again	into
his	blue	fingers.	‘You’ve	done	well.	I	thought	we’d	lose	many	of	our	animals.’
‘That	 is	 why	 I	 am	 bringing	 you	 to	 the	 Hupian	 Pass.	 It	 is	 not	 as	 high	 as	 some	 of	 the	 others,	 like	 the
Khawak,	and	the	way	up	is	not	so	hazardous	–	though	everywhere	in	these	mountains	has	its	dangers	.	.	.
You	must	always	beware—’	The	man	was	still	speaking	when	a	grinding,	crunching	sound	split	the	cold
air.	 Looking	 up,	 Babur	 saw	 a	 network	 of	 cracks	 shoot	 across	 the	 smooth	 surface	 of	 a	 cliff	 of	 ice	 high
above	 them.	 With	 a	 groan	 that	 was	 almost	 human,	 a	 rectangular	 blue-green	 slab	 sheared	 off	 and	 came
smashing	down	on	to	the	end	of	the	long	line	of	men	and	animals.
At	the	same	time,	there	was	a	roar	so	loud	that	Babur	thought	his	eardrums	would	burst.	Instinctively	he
put	 his	 hands	 over	 them.	 As	 he	 did	 so	 something	 hit	 him	 hard	 in	 the	 chest	 and	 something	 else	 sliced
against	the	side	of	his	head.	All	around,	the	air	was	full	of	missiles.	As	his	horse	neighed	in	panic,	Babur
flung	himself	to	the	ground	and,	gripping	its	halter,	crawled	beneath	its	belly.
As	 suddenly	 as	 it	 had	 begun,	 the	 avalanche	 was	 over.	 The	 surrounding	 peaks	 were	 silent	 once	 more
though	 from	 all	 around	 came	 the	 sounds	 of	 frightened	 beasts	 and	 men.	 Babur’s	 head	 throbbed	 and	 his
breastbone	 felt	 tender	 as	 cautiously	 he	 climbed	 out	 from	 beneath	 his	 horse,	 which	 was	 still	 skittering
about	but	seemed	unhurt.
‘Majesty,	 are	 you	 alright?’	 It	 was	 Baburi,	 cradling	 his	 left	 arm	 with	 his	 right	 hand,	 a	 livid	 bruise
already	welling	on	one	side	of	his	face.
Babur	nodded.	His	thick	garments	had	protected	him.	But	the	guide	was	splayed	face	down	at	his	feet.
The	man’s	shaggy	wolfskin	cap	had	not	saved	him	from	the	hunk	of	ice	that	had	smashed	into	the	back	of
his	head	with	such	force	that	his	brains	and	blood	now	spattered	the	snowy	ground.
Babur	thought	of	the	man’s	warning,	‘You	must	always	beware	.	.	.’	Those	had	been	his	last	words	on
earth.	Above	them,	the	cliff	of	ice	gleamed	like	a	mirror	in	the	sunshine	yet	at	any	moment	it	might	shed
another	deadly	load.	He	must	get	his	men	out	of	here.
‘Gather	up	the	injured,’	he	said	softly.	‘We	must	move	as	quickly	as	we	can.	Pass	the	order	down	the
line	.	.	.’
He	looked	again	at	the	crumpled	figure	at	his	feet.	There	was	no	sign	of	the	man’s	son	and	no	time	to
look	for	him.	‘Help	me,	Baburi	.	.	.’
The	guide	had	been	a	big	man	and	it	was	hard	to	sling	his	body	over	Babur’s	horse	but	it	felt	wrong	to
leave	him	there.	He	deserved	a	better	resting-place	and	Babur	intended	to	find	him	one	–	perhaps	on	the
pass	where	his	spirit	would	rest	happy.
They	hurried	on	as	fast	as	they	could,	feet	slipping	and	scrabbling	on	the	icy	ground,	until	they	reached
a	plateau.	They	should	be	safe	there	from	any	further	falls	of	ice	and	snow,	Babur	thought,	and	ordered	a
halt	so	he	could	take	stock.	The	casualties	were	not	as	bad	as	he	had	feared	–	eighteen	men	killed,	nearly
double	 that	 number	 injured,	 though	 most	 not	 badly,	 with	 six	 horses	 and	 three	 mules	 killed	 or	 too	 badly
injured	to	go	on.	Babur’s	men	had	already	slit	their	throats	and	were	preparing	them	for	the	cooking	pot.	It
could	have	been	far	worse	.	.	.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	?’	A	young	voice	interrupted	his	thoughts.	It	was	the	guide’s	son.	His	eyes	were	red	but
his	voice	was	steady.	‘I	know	the	way	forward.	I	will	be	your	guide	now.	It	is	what	my	father	would	have
wished	.	.	.’
‘I	 thank	 you,	 and	 I	 am	 sorry	 for	 your	 loss.’	 Babur	 nodded.	 He	 would	 be	 sure	 to	 reward	 him	 well	 at
journey’s	end.
Led	by	the	youth,	they	breasted	the	Hupian	Pass	just	after	dawn.	Low	on	the	southern	horizon,	a	single
brilliant	star	was	still	shining.
Babur	stared	at	it.	‘Which	is	that?	I’ve	never	seen	it	before.’

Baburi	shrugged,	but	Baisanghar	knew.	‘It	is	Canopus,	Majesty.	It	doesn’t	shine	in	our	northern	skies	in
Samarkand	and	Ferghana,	but	I	read	of	it	in	Samarkand,	in	the	books	of	Timur’s	grandson,	Ulugh	Beg	the
astronomer.	There	is	a	famous	verse:
How	far	do	you	shine,	Canopus,	and	where	do	you	rise?	You	bear	a	sign	of	fortune	in	your	eye	to
all	upon	whom	it	falls.

Before	Babur’s	eyes,	the	star	vanished	in	the	paling	sky	but	the	message	was	good.	A	sign	of	fortune	was
exactly	what	he	needed	and	he	felt	his	spirits	rise.	He	became	even	more	cheerful	when,	eight	hours	later,
snow	and	ice	yielded	to	pastures.	For	the	first	time	in	three	days	they	could	pitch	their	tents,	take	off	some
layers	of	clothing	and	ease	off	their	boots.
But	 Babur	 was	 horrified	 as,	 with	 Baisanghar	 and	 Baburi,	 he	 inspected	 the	 condition	 of	 some	 of	 the
men.	Despite	his	orders,	many	had	been	ill-prepared	for	the	mountains.	The	Mongols,	faces	burned	by	the
sun,	looked	healthy	enough,	but	Mirza	Khan’s	soldiers	were	in	poor	condition.	The	hands	and	feet	of	at
least	a	dozen	were	black	and	swollen	with	frostbite.
Babur	had	seen	such	severe	frostbite	before.	There	was	only	one	remedy	if	the	men	were	to	live.	Soon
fires	 were	 burning	 and	 swords	 were	 being	 sharpened	 on	 stones.	 With	 no	 strong	 spirits	 to	 deaden	 their
pain,	all	that	could	be	done	for	the	men	whose	fingers	and	toes	or	hands	and	feet	were	to	be	amputated
was	to	place	a	folded	cloth	between	their	teeth	to	stop	them	biting	off	their	tongues.
Mirza	Khan’s	cup-bearer	–	a	slim,	handsome	youth	of	sixteen	whose	right	hand	was	black,	swollen	to
the	size	of	a	small	melon	and	oozing	yellow	pus	from	beneath	the	nails	–	was	struggling	unsuccessfully	to
hold	back	tears	as	he	watched	a	soldier	test	the	sharpness	of	his	blade.
‘Courage.’	Babur	knelt	beside	him.	‘It	will	be	over	quickly	and	at	least	you	will	live	.	.	.	Keep	your
eyes	 on	 mine	 and	 don’t	 look	 down.’	 Babur	 gripped	 him	 by	 the	 shoulders	 while	 another	 man	 held	 the
frostbitten	arm	tight	above	the	elbow	and	a	second	man	held	his	feet.
‘Now	 –	 quickly!’	 Babur	 ordered.	 The	 boy’s	 eyes,	 wide	 with	 fright,	 stayed	 fixed	 on	 his	 face.	 As	 the
sword	sliced	down	on	his	wrist	his	body	arced	in	pain	but	though	he	bit	hard	on	the	rag	between	his	teeth
he	didn’t	utter	a	sound.	Still	gripping	the	boy,	Babur	moved	aside	to	allow	another	soldier	to	kneel	down
and	cauterise	the	bleeding	stump	with	a	blade	red	hot	from	the	fire.	This	time,	though	muffled	by	the	rag,
the	boy	did	cry	out	but	struggled	to	control	himself.
Mirza	 Khan	 was	 watching,	 curious	 but	 detached.	 He	 had	 come	 through	 the	 mountains	 unscathed	 –	 he
still	even	looked	plump	–	but	he	didn’t	seem	to	care	a	fart	for	his	men.	Babur	wanted	to	smash	his	face.
‘What	is	this	youth’s	name?’	he	asked.
‘Sayyidim.’
‘I	would	like	to	take	him	into	my	service.’
‘As	you	wish.’	Mirza	Khan	shrugged	as	if	to	say	‘What	use	is	a	one-handed	cup-bearer	to	me?’
Babur	stood	up	and	watched	as	the	boy’s	arm	was	wrapped	in	strips	of	cloth	torn	from	a	cloak.	‘Take
him	to	my	tent	and	bring	him	some	broth,’	he	ordered.	‘He’s	shown	courage.’

The	Aq	Saray	Meadow,	the	meeting-place	on	the	borders	of	the	kingdom	of	Kabul	that	the	ambassador

had	appointed,	was	pleasant	enough,	with	its	lush,	sweet	grass.	So	was	Babur’s	camp,	the	neat	lines	of
tents	 radiating	 out	 from	 his	 own	 in	 the	 centre.	 It	 was	 encouraging	 that	 his	 army	 had	 encountered	 no
hostility	from	the	people	in	the	villages	on	the	mountainsides	and	in	the	valleys	they’d	passed	through	on
their	journey	south-west,	only	curiosity	that	they	had	dared	to	come	over	the	mountains.
It	 was	 September	 now.	 The	 harvest	 was	 gathered	 and	 the	 granaries	 were	 full	 so	 the	 villagers	 were
more	than	willing	to	sell	them	food.	It	was	good	to	sit	around	a	fire	at	night	to	eat	fat,	juicy	lamb,	then	ripe
apples	and	plums,	new	picked	from	the	orchards	and	sweetened	with	honey	from	the	hives.	Blackbirds,
thrushes	and	doves	fluttered	in	the	branches	and	at	night	Babur	heard	the	call	of	the	nightingale.	This	was
a	prosperous,	abundant	land	and	when	he	was	king	in	Kabul	he’d	keep	it	so.
But	his	first	priority	was	to	enforce	discipline	in	his	camp.	Though	he	had	forbidden	looting,	six	men
had	disobeyed	him,	raiding	a	farm	and	killing	two	peasants	who	had	tried	to	defend	their	livestock.	Babur
had	had	the	culprits	found	and	flogged	to	death,	watching	stony-faced	as	the	sentence	was	carried	out	in
front	 of	 the	 murdered	 peasants’	 family.	 Then	 he	 had	 ordered	 the	 men’s	 flayed	 bodies,	 more	 pulp	 than
substance,	 to	 be	 thrown	 into	 a	 common	 grave	 dug	 on	 scrubland.	 It	 would	 be	 good	 when	 messengers
arrived	from	Kabul.	The	longer	he	was	kept	waiting,	the	more	chance	there	was	for	mischief	in	his	army.
On	the	third	day,	as	he	was	sitting	outside	his	tent,	watching	Baburi	fletch	arrows,	Babur	saw	a	small
party	of	horsemen	galloping	through	the	meadow	towards	them.
‘What	 d’you	 think?	 Is	 it	 the	 ambassador?’	 Babur	 narrowed	 his	 eyes.	 The	 figures	 were	 too	 far	 off	 to
distinguish	properly	but	that	so	few	men	should	ride	into	his	camp	suggested	they	must	be	friends.	As	they
came	closer,	Babur	saw	the	peacock	blue	of	the	ambassador’s	tunic	and	the	sun	flashing	on	the	jewelled
pin	securing	the	tall	feathers	to	his	cap.
‘Greetings,	Majesty.	I	rejoice	to	see	you	have	made	a	safe	journey	and	that	you	have	gathered	so	many
warriors	to	your	cause.	The	royal	council	salutes	you.’
Babur	nodded.	‘When	may	I	enter	the	city?’
The	ambassador’s	hazel	eyes	flickered.	‘There	is	a	problem,	Majesty.	A	usurper	–	Muhammad-Muquim
Arghun	–	has	seized	Kabul	and	the	citadel	above	it.	The	council	escaped	to	Karabagh,	outside	the	city,
with	a	few	loyal	troops	but	could	do	nothing	to	take	back	Kabul.
‘Who	is	this	man?’
‘A	chieftain	of	the	Hazara	tribe.	He	forced	his	way	into	the	city	with	his	troops.’
‘Has	he	declared	himself	king?	Has	the	khutba	been	read	in	his	name?’
‘No,	Majesty,	not	yet.	There	are	many	rivalries	between	the	tribes.’
‘How	many	soldiers	has	he?’
‘Perhaps	a	thousand,	Majesty,	maybe	a	few	more,	or	maybe	a	few	less.’
‘I	have	four	thousand	men	eager	for	a	fight.	Tell	your	council	that.	No	–	take	me	to	Karabagh.	I	did	not
bring	my	army	across	the	Hindu	Kush	so	that	others	might	profit.’
‘Yes,	 Majesty.’	 The	 ambassador	 knelt	 before	 him	 and	 touched	 his	 forehead	 to	 the	 ground.	 It	 was	 the
first	time,	Babur	reflected,	that	he	had	treated	him	as	his	king.

‘W-w-we	advise	you	to	w-w-wait,’	said	Bahlul	Ayyub,	his	stammer	exacerbated	by	his	anxiety.	The	grave
old	man	stroked	his	long,	silken	beard.	His	age	and	status	as	grand	vizier	of	Kabul	demanded	respect,	if
not	his	views,	Babur	thought	impatiently,	even	though	the	other	equally	venerable	members	of	the	council,
Wali	 Gul,	 guardian	 of	 the	 Royal	 Treasuries,	 and	 Haydar	 Taqi,	 keeper	 of	 the	 Royal	 Seal,	 were	 nodding

their	agreement.
‘What	benefit	is	there	in	delay?	It	will	only	encourage	the	Hazara	upstart	and	make	him	believe	I	am
afraid	of	him.	I	have	the	authority	of	the	royal	council.	I	have	royal	blood.	I	have	an	army.	What	more	do	I
need?’
‘W-w-we	 fear	 for	 the	 c-c-citizens	 of	 Kabul.	 Muhammad-Muquim	 Arghun	 has	 taken	 some	 of	 the
principal	citizens	hostage	–	members	of	our	families	among	them	–	and	holds	them	in	the	c-c-citadel.’
‘If	he	hurts	them,	he	will	pay.	I	shall	make	that	clear	to	him.	I	shall	also	make	clear	that	I	am	no	bandit
come	to	challenge	him	but	the	new	King	of	Kabul	come	to	take	possession	of	his	own.’
The	three	old	men	looked	at	each	other.	His	words	had	struck	home,	Babur	thought.	Perhaps	they	had
forgotten	who	they	were	dealing	with:	a	man	who	–	though	fate	had	robbed	him	–	had	by	his	ingenuity	and
daring	already	been	a	king.
‘W-w-we	are	yours	to	command,	Majesty.	That	is	understood.’

The	thick	mud	walls	around	the	city	of	Kabul	glowed	apricot	in	the	ripe	autumn	sun.	Behind	the	encircling
walls,	Babur	could	see	a	jumble	of	houses,	palaces,	caravanserais	and	mosques.	This	was	no	Samarkand
but	 he	 would	 use	 its	 wealth	 to	 create	 a	 place	 of	 beauty	 and	 magnificence.	 And	 Kabul	 was	 rich,	 an
important	trading	post	well	placed	on	the	caravan	routes	to	and	from	China,	Turkey,	Hindustan	and	Persia.
The	royal	councillors	had	told	him	with	pride	that	caravans	of	as	many	as	twenty	thousand	horses,	camels
and	other	pack	animals	passed	through,	bringing	cloth,	gems,	sugar	and	spices.
Above	the	city	to	the	north,	on	a	spur	of	barren	rock,	was	the	citadel,	its	plain	walls	pierced	by	small
apertures.	 Babur	 knew	 that	 many	 eyes	 –	 including	 those	 of	 Muhammad-Muquim	 Arghun	 –	 would	 be
watching,	which	was	as	he	intended.	He	had	ordered	his	men	to	arm	themselves	as	heavily	and	obviously
as	possible.	Swords,	spears	and	axes	glinted.	Bows	hung	from	their	shoulders	and	their	quivers	were	full.
He	wished	his	enemy	to	be	in	no	doubt	about	his	overwhelming	strength.
His	men	spread	out	behind	him	in	battle	formation,	Babur	advanced	slowly	past	the	walls	of	the	city
towards	 the	 citadel,	 then	 halted.	 Ordering	 his	 men	 to	 stay	 ready	 for	 battle	 in	 case	 of	 any	 sudden	 sortie
from	the	city	or	the	citadel,	he	called	Kasim	to	his	side.	‘You	will	once	more	be	my	ambassador.	Take	an
escort	 and	 ride	 up	 to	 the	 citadel	 with	 my	 ultimatum	 to	 Muhammad-Muquim	 Arghun.	 If	 he	 frees	 his
hostages	 unharmed	 and	 withdraws	 from	 the	 fortress	 and	 the	 city	 by	 sunset	 he	 may	 depart	 free	 and
unmolested.	If	he	refuses,	I	will	give	him	no	quarter.’
Babur	 watched	 Kasim	 gallop	 up	 towards	 the	 citadel	 with	 four	 of	 his	 soldiers.	 Ambassadors	 were
always	vulnerable	but	Kasim	had	proved	his	courage	before	in	such	a	situation	and	Babur	was	confident
he	 would	 not	 be	 put	 to	 the	 test	 this	 time	 .	 .	 .	 Muhammad-Muquim	 Arghun	 would	 not	 dare	 to	 harm	 him.
Meanwhile,	other	things	must	be	done.	He	summoned	Baisanghar.	‘I	want	the	people	in	the	city	to	know
what	 I’ve	 said.	 I	 have	 ordered	 the	 scribes	 to	 make	 copies	 of	 my	 message.	 Tell	 your	 best	 archers	 to	 tie
them	to	arrows	and	shoot	them	into	the	city	where	people	can	find	them	and	read	my	words.’
Now	 he	 must	 wait.	 A	 pity	 there	 were	 so	 many	 flies.	 They	 were	 making	 his	 grey	 restive	 and	 it	 was
flicking	its	dark	tail	from	side	to	side.	He	slid	from	his	saddle,	hobbled	the	horse	so	that	it	could	graze	but
not	 wander	 far,	 and	 sat	 cross-legged	 on	 the	 stony	 ground.	 High	 above,	 a	 flock	 of	 cranes	 flew	 over,	 the
birds	of	heaven.	A	sign	that	God	was	with	him.
‘What	do	you	think	he’ll	do?’	Baburi	flung	himself	down	beside	him,	still	holding	his	horse’s	reins.
‘That	Hazara	bandit?	He’s	no	Shaibani	Khan.	I	doubt	he	has	any	support	among	the	people	–	he	should

be	grateful	I’m	prepared	to	let	him	go.’
‘You’ve	altered.	D’you	remember	that	fight	we	had	when	I	accused	you	of	self-pity?’
‘What	you	said	was	right.	I	was	feeling	sorry	for	myself.	You	convinced	me	to	keep	my	belief	–	that
anything	could	happen	.	.	.	Surviving	on	the	streets	has	made	you	wiser	than	I.	Perhaps	princes	should	be
turned	out	of	doors	to	fend	for	themselves	when	they	are	young	.	.	.’
‘Perhaps	–	though	I	wouldn’t	recommend	the	food	.	.	.	or	the	dirty	old	men	who	try	to	get	you	into	an
alley.’
Babur	laughed.
The	sun	was	barely	a	spear’s	height	above	the	western	horizon	and	the	time	was	nearly	up	when	Kasim
returned.	 He	 looked	 pleased.	 ‘The	 Hazaras	 argued	 among	 themselves,	 even	 coming	 to	 blows	 –	 but
Muhammad-Muquim	 Arghun	 accepts	 your	 terms.	 He	 is	 preparing	 to	 lead	 his	 men	 out	 of	 the	 citadel	 and
head	north.	He	is	also	ordering	his	troops	in	the	city	to	join	him.	He	asks	that	you	remain	here	two	hours
but	then	Kabul,	and	the	hostages,	are	yours	.	.	.’
‘He	is	more	afraid	of	me	than	I	thought.	You	have	done	well.’
As	the	news	spread	among	Babur’s	troops,	a	great	roar	went	up	as	men	beat	their	swords	against	their
shields	and	there	was	other	noise	as	well.	Though	faint	and	far	off,	it	was	unmistakable	–	voices	rising
clamorously	within	the	city.	The	citizens	must	have	learned	what	had	happened.
Babur	mounted	again	and	rode	slowly	out	before	his	men.	‘Just	the	sight	of	us	was	enough	to	make	this
upstart	piss	himself.	In	a	short	while,	he	and	his	men	will	slink	away	like	beaten	dogs	that	dare	not	bark,
let	alone	bite.	Let	them	hear	our	scorn	and	laughter	as	they	depart	into	the	fading	light,	their	swords	still
bright	and	unbloodied,	their	honour	tarnished.’
That	night,	dressed	in	robes	of	purple	and	gold	–	the	colours	of	the	King	of	Kabul	–	the	nobles	of	the
royal	 council	 and	 his	 commanders	 with	 him,	 Babur	 entered	 Kabul’s	 main	 mosque.	 The	 prayer	 place
marked	for	the	king	–	just	in	front	of	the	mihrab,	 which	 indicated	 the	 direction	 of	 Mecca	 –	 was	 where
Timur	must	have	knelt	when	he	had	prayed	here	on	his	way	to	Hindustan,	Babur	thought,	as	he	knelt	and
touched	his	forehead	to	the	cool	stone.	When	he	heard	the	royal	mullah	read	the	sermon,	the	khutba,	in	his
name	–	the	sacred	moment	that	made	him	king	–	he	felt	a	swell	of	hope	and	pride.	He	was	no	longer	a
wanderer	without	a	home.
As	the	mullah	moved	on	to	a	new	prayer,	Babur	listened	carefully:
	
It	is	you,	God,	who	bestows	kingdoms	on	whom	you	will,
And	you	take	them	from	whom	you	will.
You	raise	up	those	whom	you	will,
And	you	cast	down	those	whom	you	will.
You	are	the	fount	of	goodness,
For	you	are	almighty.
	
God	was	indeed	all-powerful	and	he	had	been	good	to	Babur.

	
	
	

Part	III
Governing	by	the	Sword

	
	
	

Chapter	15
Lord	of	the	Bow
	

Luckily	the	city’s	coffers	had	proved	even	fuller	than	Babur	had	hoped.	As	Wali	Gul	had	promised,	the
Hazaras	had	never	found	the	royal	treasure	vaults	concealed	beneath	the	stables	in	the	citadel.	‘If	they’d
only	shovelled	away	the	horse	shit,	Majesty,	they	might	have	found	them,	but	the	Hazaras	are	too	proud
for	such	work.’	The	old	man	had	chortled	as	his	servants	brushed	away	the	foot-deep	layer	of	steaming
dung	and	straw	to	reveal	a	trapdoor	and	steps	leading	down	to	eight	subterranean	chambers.	Behind	the
thick,	 iron-bound	 oak	 doors	 there	 had	 been	 enough	 gold	 and	 silver	 for	 Babur	 to	 reward	 his	 men	 well,
recruit	more	troops	and	beautify	his	new	kingdom.
He	rolled	up	the	large	plan	he	had	been	studying.	On	it,	laid	out	on	a	grid	of	squares,	was	the	design	for
the	great	domed	mosque	he	had	commissioned	for	the	central	square	of	Kabul	using	some	of	this	wealth.
Even	 though	 he	 had	 been	 invited	 to	 Kabul	 and	 its	 wide	 territories	 by	 its	 leaders	 and	 welcomed	 by	 the
people,	 his	 new	 subjects	 –	 Aymaqs,	 Pashais,	 Tajiks	 and	 Barakis	 on	 the	 plains	 and,	 in	 the	 mountains,
Hazaras	and	Negudaris,	and	the	citizens	of	Kabul	itself	–	were	even	more	prone	to	jealousies	and	blood
feuds	than	the	tribes	of	Ferghana.	It	would	do	no	harm	to	remind	them	–	Sunni	Muslims	like	himself	–	that
it	was	by	God’s	will	that	he	ruled.
Also,	 it	 would	 feel	 good	 to	 leave	 his	 permanent	 mark	 on	 the	 city	 –	 a	 monument	 to	 remind	 future
generations	 of	 his	 rule,	 something	 he’d	 never	 had	 the	 chance	 to	 create	 in	 Samarkand.	 He’d	 never	 been
there	long	enough	–	and,	anyway,	how	could	he	have	embellished	a	place	already	made	so	beautiful	by
Timur?	At	least	in	Kabul	he	could	fashion	a	capital	worthy	of	a	prince	of	Timur’s	line	–	a	place	where
scholars	and	craftsmen	would	gather.
Now,	though,	he	had	unpleasant	business	to	attend	to.	A	month	ago,	Baisanghar	had	brought	him	reports
that	Ali	Gosht	–	Babur’s	master-of-horse	whom	he	had	promoted	to	chief	quartermaster	–	had	been	taking
bribes	to	favour	certain	horse	dealers	and	forage	suppliers	in	Kabul.	This	was	against	Babur’s	express
orders.	He’d	repeatedly	promised	the	local	people	that	he’d	deal	fairly	with	them	but	now,	thanks	to	Ali
Gosht’s	greed,	they	would	be	justified	in	murmuring	against	a	king	who	had	broken	his	word	so	lightly	.	.	.
Babur	had	wanted	more	evidence	–	he	had	known	Ali	Gosht	all	his	life,	in	fact	the	man	had	taught	him
to	ride	and	play	polo	–	but	Baisanghar	had	brought	him	further	proof	and	now	he	must	act.	He	made	his
way	 to	 the	 arched	 audience	 hall	 where	 his	 council	 were	 standing	 at	 either	 side	 of	 the	 gilded	 throne	 in
order	 of	 precedence,	 the	 most	 senior	 members	 closest	 to	 him.	 Seating	 himself,	 Babur	 nodded	 to
Baisanghar.	‘Bring	in	the	quartermaster.’
He	 watched,	 expressionless,	 as	 Ali	 Gosht,	 his	 familiar	 bandy-legged	 gait	 even	 more	 pronounced
because	of	the	heavy	irons	dragging	at	his	legs,	shuffled	towards	him.	Outwardly	he	looked	defiant	but
Babur	knew	he	was	anxious.	His	battle	scars	were	more	than	usually	livid	on	his	taut	face	and	his	eyes
moved	nervously	from	one	counsellor	to	the	next	as	he	approached	the	throne.	He	didn’t	look	at	Babur,
and	before	the	guards	behind	him	could	jab	at	him	with	the	butts	of	their	spears	he	fell	to	his	knees.
‘You	know	what	you	are	accused	of	.	.	.’
‘Majesty,	I—’

‘Just	answer	me.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘And	is	it	true?’
‘It	is	the	way	things	have	always	been	done	.	.	.’
‘But	I	gave	you	specific	orders	to	treat	the	dealers	and	merchants	fairly.	You	disobeyed	me	.	.	.’
Ali	Gosht	raised	his	head	and	licked	dry	lips.	‘You	know	the	tradition	among	our	people,	Majesty,	from
the	 days	 of	 Genghis	 Khan.	 The	 highest	 officials	 of	 the	 court	 should	 not	 be	 punished	 until	 their	 ninth
transgression.’
‘And	you	have	transgressed	at	least	a	dozen	times	.	.	.	I	have	all	the	details.’
His	quartermaster	crumpled	even	lower	on	the	hard	stone	floor.	Babur	looked	at	his	bowed	head	–	the
neck	thick	and	muscular	but	so	vulnerable	to	the	executioner’s	sword.	Ali	Gosht	must	know	these	might	be
his	last	minutes	on	earth.	What	was	going	through	his	mind?
In	 the	 long,	 deep	 silence	 it	 seemed	 to	 Babur	 that	 all	 around	 him	 his	 counsellors	 were	 holding	 their
breath.
‘You	are	dismissed	from	my	service.	If	you	are	found	in	Kabul	after	sunset	tonight	you	will	die.	Take
him	away.’
‘You	should	have	had	him	executed,’	said	Baburi	later,	as	they	rode	out	of	the	citadel	to	go	hawking.
Babur’s	bird,	secured	to	his	gloved	wrist	by	a	golden	chain,	was	turning	its	head	restlessly	beneath	its
tufted	yellow	leather	hood,	sensing	that	soon	it	would	soar	skywards.
‘You	say	that	because	you	didn’t	like	Ali	Gosht	.	.	.	because	he	clouted	you	.	.	.’
‘He	also	told	me	I	was	only	good	for	shovelling	horse	shit	.	.	.	No,	of	course	I	didn’t	like	him.	You
know	I	despised	the	old	goat.	He	was	an	arrogant,	conceited	bully	who	fawned	to	his	superiors	but	liked
swinging	his	fists	at	those	in	his	power.	But	that’s	not	why	I	spoke	as	I	did.	Your	own	men,	and	the	people
of	Kabul,	will	think	you	sentimental	and	weak.’
Babur	 leaned	 from	 his	 saddle	 and	 gripped	 Baburi’s	 wrist.	 ‘Anyone	 who	 thinks	 that	 is	 wrong.	 It	 took
more	courage	to	allow	him	to	live.	It	would	have	been	far	easier	to	order	his	execution.	When	I	was	only
twelve,	 I	 personally	 hacked	 off	 the	 head	 of	 my	 father’s	 treacherous	 vizier,	 Qambar-Ali.	 But	 Ali	 Gosht
was	loyal	to	me	when	I	was	a	wanderer	without	a	throne	in	need	of	friends	and	he	had	little	to	gain	from
his	loyalty	to	me.	Nevertheless,	in	future	any	man	who	disobeys	my	orders	–	whoever	he	may	be	–	will
die.’

Though	it	was	early	spring,	the	cold	northerly	wind	the	people	of	Kabul	called	the	parwan	still	flecked
with	 white	 the	 dark	 green	 waters	 of	 the	 lake	 beneath	 the	 citadel	 and	 ruffled	 the	 feathers	 of	 the	 ducks
sheltering	among	the	reeds.	But	the	snows	were	gone,	the	pastures	and	meadows	bursting	into	new	life.
Vermilion	 tulips	 dotted	 the	 foothills,	 and	 in	 the	 forests	 strutting	 snow-cocks	 called	 in	 search	 of	 mates.
Peasants	wrapped	warmly	against	the	winds	were	busily	tending	the	rows	of	vines	that,	in	a	few	months,
would	yield	the	sweet,	golden	ab-angur	grapes	for	the	wine	the	courtiers	relished	in	summer,	chilling	it
with	ice	carried	in	chunks	from	the	mountains	and	stored	in	ice-houses.
Babur	stretched	beneath	the	wolfskin	coverlet	he	still	needed	for	warmth	at	night,	though	the	Negudari
girl	–	skin	the	golden	tawny	of	the	honey	gathered	in	the	mountains	from	which	she	came	–	with	whom
he’d	shared	his	bed	until	dawn	had	been	more	than	enough	to	heat	his	blood.	Later	he	might	go	hunting
with	Baburi.	Though	there	was	little	game,	the	wild	mountain	sheep	migrating	between	their	winter	and

summer	pastures	and	the	occasional	wild	ass	provided	surprisingly	good	sport.
Or	perhaps	he	would	visit	the	garden	he	had	ordered	to	be	laid	out	in	the	clover	meadows	on	a	hillside
above	Kabul.	Already	workmen	were	clearing	the	ground	and	digging	channels	through	the	cold	earth	for
the	intersecting	watercourses,	the	central	pool	and	the	fountains	the	nearby	river	would	feed.	Soon	riders
would	bring	the	sour-cherry	saplings	he	had	ordered	from	the	east	of	his	kingdom	to	be	planted	among	the
oranges,	lemons,	pomegranates	and	apples.	In	this	fertile	earth	they	would	grow	quickly.	By	the	time	his
mother	and	grandmother	joined	him,	there	might	be	something	to	see.
Babur	 flung	 back	 the	 wolfskin,	 stood	 up	 and	 stretched.	 Sunlight	 was	 pouring	 through	 the	 carved
fretwork	 of	 the	 sandalwood	 doors	 on	 the	 eastern	 side	 of	 his	 chamber,	 with	 gave	 on	 to	 a	 stone	 balcony
projecting	over	the	courtyard	below.	For	centuries	the	kings	of	Kabul	had	stood	here	on	great	occasions	to
show	themselves	to	their	people.	It	felt	good	to	have	earned	that	right.

‘What	are	you	doing?	This	is	the	third	time	I’ve	found	you	scribbling	away.’	Baburi’s	shadow	fell	across
the	paper	on	which	Babur	was	writing.
‘It’s	a	diary.	When	I	took	Samarkand	from	Shaibani	Khan,	I	decided	to	record	what	happened	in	my	life
.	.	.	but	when	I	lost	the	city	.	.	.	when	I	was	forced	to	flee	for	my	life,	I	put	it	aside	.	.	.’
‘Why	did	you	stop?	It	might	have	comforted	you	.	.	.’
Babur	 put	 down	 his	 pen.	 ‘Some	 things	 were	 too	 painful	 to	 dwell	 on	 –	 the	 loss	 of	 my	 sister,	 Wazir
Khan’s	 death	 .	 .	 .	 And	 when	 I	 was	 a	 fugitive,	 what	 could	 I	 write	 about	 except	 failure,	 the	 struggle	 to
survive	and	how	a	half-bowl	of	millet-flour	soup	tasted	when	I	was	starving?	There	would	have	been	no
comfort	in	writing	about	such	things	.	.	.	only	shame	.	.	.	only	the	self-pity	you	once	derided	me	for	.	.	.’
‘And	now?’
‘I	am	a	king	again	.	.	.	I	suppose	I	feel	worthy	to	record	my	memoirs	.	.	.	But	there’s	something	else.	Do
you	 remember	 how,	 as	 we	 came	 over	 the	 Hindu	 Kush,	 we	 saw	 the	 Canopus	 star	 shining	 so	 pure	 and
bright?	At	that	moment,	I	vowed	that	if	Kabul	became	mine,	never,	ever	would	I	lose	the	initiative	again.
Never	again	would	I	let	myself	be	pushed	around	by	marauders	like	Shaibani	Khan,	ambitious	relations	or
mutinous	subjects.	I	would	control	my	own	destiny.	I	can	achieve	that,	I	feel	it	with	every	breath	I	take
.	.	.’
‘And	is	that	what	you	are	writing	about?’
‘In	a	way	.	.	.	I	want	my	future	sons,	and	their	sons	after	them,	to	know	everything	that	happened	to	me	–
to	know	my	achievements,	my	strengths	–	but	I	also	want	them	to	understand	my	mistakes	.	.	.	my	failings
.	.	.	my	thoughts	.	.	.	the	choices	I	had	to	make	to	survive	.	.	.	From	now	on,	I	intend	to	record	everything
that	happens	–	good	or	bad	–	frankly	and	honestly	.	.	.’
‘Including	the	number	of	times	you	had	that	Negudari	girl	the	other	night?’
‘Even	that	.	.	.	A	man	can	be	proud	of	many	things	.	.	.’	Babur	grinned,	but	then	his	expression	sobered.
He	 couldn’t	 push	 from	 his	 mind	 his	 discussion	 with	 his	 grand	 vizier	 earlier	 that	 day.	 ‘Bahlul	 Ayyub
requested	an	audience	with	me	this	morning.’
‘That	waffling	old	woman,	wh-wh-what	did	he	w-want?’	Baburi	was	no	respecter	of	age	or	status	and
was	fond	of	parodying	the	grand	vizier’s	high,	quavering	voice	and	fluttering	hands.
‘He	brought	bad	news,	though	it	was	not	unexpected.	The	Hazaras	are	raiding	caravans	on	the	roads	to
and	from	Kabul	–	despite	my	orders	that	they	must	not	be	molested	–	and	are	refusing	to	pay	the	fine	of
horses	and	sheep	I	imposed	on	them	.	.	.	The	messenger	Wali	Gul	sent	to	Muhammad-Muquim	Arghun	to

demand	payment	was	returned	this	morning	.	.	.	without	his	ears	to	signify	the	Hazaras’	deafness	to	my
commands	.	.	.’
‘Then	Muhammad-Muquim	Arghun	is	even	more	stupid	than	he	looks	.	.	.’
‘His	insolence	is	certainly	greater	than	his	brains	and	the	Hazaras	are	a	lawless	breed.	If	I	don’t	bring
them	 to	 heel	 quickly,	 the	 other	 clans	 will	 grow	 rebellious.	 I	 have	 already	 decided	 what	 to	 do	 .	 .	 .	 As
punishment	for	the	messenger’s	ears,	the	life	of	every	captured	Hazara	warrior	will	be	forfeit.	I’ll	build
pyramids	of	their	heads	higher	than	anything	Timur	created	.	.	.’
‘Let	 me	 go	 –	 send	 me	 out	 with	 a	 force.	 I’ll	 flush	 the	 bastards	 from	 their	 mountain	 hideaways	 and
remove	their	heads	from	their	shoulders	.	.	.’
Babur	looked	at	his	friend.	There	was	no	doubting	his	seriousness:	his	voice	shook	with	passion	and
there	was	an	eager	light	in	his	eyes.	He	was	a	good,	brave	soldier	but	he	had	never	been	in	command.
‘You’re	sure	you	can	lead?’
‘Of	course.	You’re	not	the	only	one	to	have	faith	in	himself	.	.	.’
Babur	 pondered.	 Others	 would	 grumble	 and	 wonder	 why	 he	 had	 chosen	 Baburi	 above	 them.	 Even
Baisanghar	would	probably	look	askance.	But	why	not	follow	his	instincts	and	give	Baburi	the	chance	he
was	obviously	aching	for?
‘Alright.	You	go.’
‘And	your	orders	are	no	quarter?’
‘No	quarter	to	Muhammad-Muquim	Arghun	and	his	men,	but	spare	the	women	and	children.’
‘I	won’t	disappoint	you.’	Baburi’s	high	cheekbones	lent	his	face	a	predatory,	wolfish	look.
After	he	had	gone,	Babur	thought	for	a	moment,	then	took	up	his	pen	again	to	finish	what	he	had	been
writing	when	Baburi	had	interrupted	him:	‘This	kingdom	is	to	be	governed	by	the	sword	and	not	the	pen.’

Seven	hog	deer	were	already	suspended	from	the	huntsmen’s	poles	but	this	nilgai	was	a	bonus.	Babur	had
read	of	the	antelope’s	strange	blue-grey	coat,	its	black	mane	and	the	long,	thick,	silky	hairs	covering	its
throat	but	had	never	before	seen	one.	The	creatures	concealed	in	the	dense	oak	and	olive	forests	in	the
east	of	his	kingdom	–	gaudy	parrots,	shrieking	mynah	birds,	peacocks	and	monkeys	–	astonished	him.	He
was	glad	he	had	chosen	this	place	for	the	royal	hunt	to	celebrate	Baburi’s	crushing	of	the	Hazaras.	Five
days	ago,	Baburi	had	returned	to	Kabul	at	the	head	of	his	men	to	fling	the	mangled	head	of	MuhammadMuquim	Arghun	at	Babur’s	feet.	Now	he,	too,	was	watching	the	nilgai.
‘Yours,’	Babur	whispered.	It	was	only	right.
Baburi	fixed	his	indigo	eyes	on	the	nilgai,	nosing	among	the	juniper	bushes,	as	he	fitted	his	arrow	to	his
bow-string	and	stretched	the	tight	sinew	till	the	double	curved	bow	looked	ready	to	snap.
Babur	 watched	 the	 white-feathered	 arrow	 embed	 itself	 in	 the	 soft	 throat	 of	 the	 unsuspecting	 deer,
which,	with	scarcely	a	sound	or	a	flicker	of	its	long-lashed	eyes,	collapsed	sideways	to	the	ground.	For	a
moment	Babur	saw	not	a	stricken	beast	but	Wazir	Khan,	an	Uzbek	arrow	through	his	throat,	sliding	from
his	horse	into	a	fast-flowing	river	and	looked	away.	Memories	and	emotions	came	when	they	were	least
expected.	He	should	know	that	by	now.	‘Well	done.	You’re	a	good	shot.’
‘For	a	market	boy	.	.	.’
The	feast	that	night	was	the	most	lavish	Babur	had	given	since	celebrating	the	taking	of	Kabul.	In	the
orange	light	of	torches,	he	sat	on	a	pinewood	dais	in	the	courtyard	of	the	modest	fort	he	was	occupying	on
this	hunting	trip,	Baburi	next	to	him.	Soon	Babur	would	order	the	ulush	–	the	‘champion’s	portion’	–	of	the

first	sheep	to	be	served	to	Baburi.	He	would	toast	him	in	the	strong,	full-bodied	red	wine	of	Kabul	and
award	him	the	title	of	Qor	Begi,	Lord	of	the	Bow,	for	his	skill	in	battle.
But	later,	as	he	drank	from	his	double-handled	goblet,	carved	from	ox	horn	and	mounted	in	silver,	and
listened	 to	 his	 men	 roar	 out	 their	 songs	 of	 valour	 in	 the	 field	 and	 greater	 valour	 in	 bed,	 he	 felt
dissatisfaction	seep	through	him	with	the	wine	just	when	other	rulers	would	have	been	content.	After	all,
Baburi	 had	 quelled	 the	 Hazaras	 and	 cemented	 their	 heads	 into	 enough	 festering	 pyramids	 to	 strike	 fear
into	passers-by	and	serve	as	a	warning	for	the	future.	Kabul	–	his	haven	and	the	balm	to	his	dignity	–	was
secure.	He	was	enjoying	planting	his	gardens	and	planning	new	buildings	for	his	capital.	Why	wasn’t	it
enough?	Because	ambition	still	gnawed	at	his	soul,	sucking	out	the	happiness.
Taking	 another	 deep	 draught	 of	 wine,	 Babur	 continued	 to	 brood.	 In	 a	 few	 days	 his	 grandmother	 and
mother	would	arrive	from	Kishm.	His	mother	would	be	all	pleasure	at	their	reunion	but	he	knew	that	in
her	heart	would	be	the	unspoken	question	of	when	he	would	be	able	to	redeem	his	promise	to	rescue	his
sister.	In	Esan	Dawlat’s	sharp	eyes	he	sensed	he	would	see	the	same	question	that	troubled	him:	what	to
do	next?	What	new	conquest?	Where	and	when?	Neither	Timur	nor	her	revered	Genghis	Khan	had	ever
rested	in	one	place	long,	satisfied	with	what	they	had,	as	she	would	no	doubt	remind	him	.	.	.
‘You	look	like	a	man	whose	favourite	horse	has	gone	lame	just	before	the	big	race.’	Baburi’s	lean	face
was	flushed	with	wine	and	round	his	neck	hung	the	gold	chain	Babur	had	given	him	for	his	cunning	and
bravery	against	the	Hazaras.
‘I	was	thinking	.	.	.	Ten	years	ago,	when	I	least	expected,	I	became	a	king.	But	what	I	always	expected	–
even	 before	 then	 –	 was	 that	 destiny	 held	 something	 special	 for	 me	 .	 .	 .’	 He	 ignored	 Baburi’s	 usual
sceptical	glance.	How	could	he	possibly	understand	what	it	had	been	like	growing	up	in	a	court	where	the
father	you	loved	talked	only	of	the	greatness	that	might	have	been	and	the	greatness	that	might	yet	be	.	.	.
‘The	truth	is	I’m	restless	–	unsatisfied.	Kabul	is	all	very	well	but	I	want	more.	Every	day	when	I	open
my	diary	to	write	in	it,	I	wonder	what	the	future	pages	will	say	.	.	.	Will	they	describe	great	glories,	great
victories,	or	will	they	be	blank	.	.	.	?	I	must	not	relax	but	hold	firm	to	my	destiny.	I	can’t	allow	the	pages
of	my	life	to	turn	with	nothing	memorable	inscribed	upon	them.’
‘So	what	are	you	thinking	of	doing	.	.	.	?	Attacking	Shaibani	Khan?’
‘As	soon	as	my	armies	are	stronger.	But	not	yet.	I’d	be	a	fool	to	take	him	on	so	soon	.	.	.’
‘What	else,	then?’
Babur	 took	 another	 long	 drink	 and	 felt	 the	 wine	 flow	 through	 his	 body,	 freeing	 his	 tongue	 and	 his
imagination.	Suddenly	an	idea	that	had	long	been	at	the	back	of	his	mind	crystallised.	‘Hindustan	.	.	.	that’s
where	I’d	like	to	go.	Do	you	remember	Rehana’s	story?	If	I	captured	treasure,	as	Timur	did,	no	one,	not
Shaibani	Khan	or	even	the	Shah	of	Persia,	could	stand	in	my	way.’	He	swayed	on	his	seat.	Baburi’s	hand
was	on	his	shoulder,	steadying	him,	but	he	shook	it	off.	In	his	mind	he	saw	a	little	golden	elephant	with
ruby	eyes	.	.	.
‘You	should	follow	your	instincts.’
Babur	peered	at	him	blearily.	‘What	.	.	.	?’
‘I	said	follow	your	instincts	.	.	.	see	where	your	so-called	destiny	that	you	love	so	much	leads	you	.	.	.’
Though	 Baburi’s	 voice	 seemed	 to	 come	 from	 far	 away	 and	 was	 half	 drowned	 in	 the	 drunken	 hubbub
around	 them,	 the	 message	 penetrated	 Babur’s	 mind	 with	 complete	 clarity,	 sobering	 him	 in	 spite	 of	 the
wine	.	.	.	Yes,	he	would	muster	a	force	and	raid	south	along	the	Kabul	river	towards	Hindustan.	He	would
gaze	 on	 the	 broad	 Indus,	 contemplate	 the	 prospect	 of	 awesome	 riches	 beyond	 and	 perhaps	 even	 seize
some.

At	Babur’s	request,	the	court	astrologers	consulted	the	planets.	Night	after	night	they	studied	their	charts
and	scrutinised	the	infinitely	complex	web	of	stars	lighting	the	dark	skies	over	Kabul.	January,	when	the
sun	 was	 in	 the	 sign	 of	 Aquarius,	 would	 be	 an	 auspicious	 time	 for	 him	 to	 launch	 his	 campaign,	 they
pronounced	 at	 last,	 stroking	 their	 beards.	 Babur	 wasn’t	 sure	 he	 believed	 their	 predictions,	 but	 his	 men
would.	It	was	good	for	them	to	believe	the	stars	blessed	their	journey	into	an	unknown	world.	At	least	the
astrologers’	advice	gave	him	time	to	prepare:	he	could	spend	the	next	few	months	building	up	his	forces
and	considering	his	strategy.

As	the	last	of	the	autumn	fruit	was	being	gathered	from	the	orchards	around	Kabul,	Babur’s	mother	and
grandmother	 arrived	 from	 Kishm.	 He	 hadn’t	 wanted	 to	 send	 for	 them	 too	 soon	 –	 the	 Hazara	 rising	 had
made	him	cautious	–	but	his	heart	swelled	with	pride	to	hear	the	trumpets	sound	and	the	drums	over	the
gatehouse	thud	as	they	and	their	escort	entered	the	citadel.	Kutlugh	Nigar	had	noticeably	lost	weight	and
looked	tired	and	frail	after	the	long	journey	–	Babur	saw	how	heavily	she	leaned	on	Fatima’s	arm	–	but
Esan	Dawlat	seemed	vigorous	as	ever.
As	 soon	 as	 they	 were	 alone	 she	 took	 Babur’s	 face	 between	 her	 hands	 and	 stared	 at	 him.	 ‘You’ve
become	a	man,’	she	nodded	approvingly,	releasing	him.	‘Look,	daughter,	your	son	has	changed	these	past
months	 –	 see	 how	 he	 has	 broadened.’	 She	 slapped	 his	 chest	 and	 poked	 at	 one	 of	 his	 upper	 arms	 as	 if
inspecting	a	prize	animal.	‘Muscles	like	iron.’
Kutlugh	Nigar	gazed	at	him	but	said	nothing.	She	had	grown	so	silent	–	so	different	from	the	mentally
strong	woman	who	had	determinedly	guided	his	steps	to	the	throne	of	Ferghana	in	the	uncertain	hours	after
his	father’s	death	–	so	less	physically	strong	than	when	she’d	purposefully	swarmed	up	the	mountains	not
two	years	previously.
‘I’ve	something	to	tell	you	both.	When	January	comes	I’m	leaving	Kabul	to	lead	my	army	south	towards
Hindustan	to	try	my	fortune	there.	Baisanghar	will	be	regent	in	my	absence	.	.	.’
As	his	words	sank	in,	Esan	Dawlat	nodded	her	approval,	but	something	stirred	in	Kutlugh	Nigar.	She
rose	from	the	gold	brocade	bolster	against	which	she	had	been	reclining	and,	shaking	her	head	from	side
to	 side,	 seemed	 to	 be	 struggling	 to	 find	 words.	 It	 shocked	 Babur	 to	 see	 tears	 begin	 coursing	 down	 her
cheeks	–	tears	that	she	made	no	effort	to	brush	away.	Before	his	eyes	her	whole	body	began	to	shake	and
her	hands	to	twist	in	her	long	dark	hair,	now	streaked	with	white.
‘Daughter	.	.	.’	Esan	Dawlat’s	voice	was	stiff	with	disapproval.
Babur	took	his	mother	in	his	arms,	trying	to	soothe	her	as	if	she	were	a	small	child	and	he	the	parent.
‘What	is	it?’
‘Khanzada	–	have	you	forgotten	your	promise,	Babur?	You	promised	you	would	rescue	her.	Why	are
you	wasting	time	riding	south	.	.	.’
It	 hurt	 as	 much	 as	 if	 she’d	 struck	 him.	 He	 flushed	 as	 the	 familiar	 mix	 of	 shame,	 frustration	 and	 grief
washed	through	him.	‘She	is	always	in	my	mind.	I	will	keep	that	promise.	But	now	is	not	the	time.	I	must
have	more	men,	more	money,	before	I	can	challenge	Shaibani	Khan.	This	raid	may	give	me	those	things.
But	I	swear	to	you	that	as	soon	as	I	can	I	will	find	Khanzada	.	.	.’
At	length	his	mother’s	sobbing	quietened	and	her	body	stilled.	Babur	kissed	the	top	of	her	head,	but	the
turmoil	she	had	provoked	inside	him	would	take	a	long	time	to	die	away	.	.	.

In	the	weeks	that	followed,	he	tried	to	lose	himself	in	the	preparations	for	the	Hindustan	campaign.	He
would	take	the	same	route	–	south-east	along	the	Kabul	river	and	down	through	the	Khyber	Pass	–	that
Timur	had	used	a	century	earlier.
In	the	brief	time	before	the	snows	arrived,	whitening	the	grassy	meadows	and	softening	the	landscape
so	 that	 it	 was	 hard	 to	 see	 where	 the	 mountains	 ended	 and	 the	 pale	 skies	 began,	 Baisanghar	 and	 Baburi
trained	the	men	–	their	own	forces	and	new	recruits	from	the	local	tribes.	The	tribesmen	weren’t	bad	.	.	.
Babur	watched	them	learn	to	fire	from	the	saddle	at	straw	targets	and	spear	melons	and	sheep’s	heads	on
the	ground	as	they	thundered	past	.	.	.	but	who	knew	what	awaited	them?
On	many	a	night	Babur	listened	to	travelling	merchants	regaling	open-mouthed	and	credulous	listeners
with	 tales	 of	 exotic	 creatures	 –	 even	 monsters	 –	 lurking	 in	 Hindustan’s	 forests	 of	 banyan	 trees,	 whose
aerial	roots	would	twist	round	the	throat	of	an	unwary	traveller	and	squeeze	the	breath	from	him,	of	naked
holy	 men,	 yogis,	 followers	 of	 their	 idolatrous	 religion	 with	 white	 ash	 on	 their	 faces	 who	 lived	 in	 dark
caves	and	never	cut	their	hair	or	beards.	Childish	nonsense,	most	of	it	.	.	.	but	he	intended	to	be	prepared.
It	 was	 a	 relief	 when	 January	 finally	 arrived.	 Though	 the	 snow	 still	 lay	 thick,	 the	 worst	 of	 the	 winter
storms	were	over	and	they	could	ride.
Six	days’	steady	advance	–	the	pace	set	by	the	drummers’	rhythmic	beating	–	brought	Babur	and	his	two
thousand	 men	 to	 the	 approaches	 to	 the	 Khyber	 Pass.	 But	 on	 the	 seventh	 day,	 with	 the	 sun	 at	 its	 height,
leaching	all	colour	from	the	increasingly	barren	landscape,	Babur	thought	he	detected	a	movement	among
some	rocks	on	a	low	hill	just	ahead	to	the	right.	Signalling	a	halt	he	stared	up.
‘What	is	it?’	As	Baburi	spoke	a	shower	of	scree	skittered	down	the	hillside.
‘I	don’t	know.	I’ve	posted	men	in	a	protective	cordon	all	round	the	column.	How	could	ambushers	have
slipped	through?	Let’s	climb	up	and	take	a	look	.	.	.’
Babur	jumped	from	his	horse.	‘Some	of	you,	draw	your	bows	and	keep	us	covered,’	he	called	to	his
bodyguards.	‘The	rest,	come	with	us.’
A	few	minutes	later,	Babur	looked	around	the	bare,	stony	summit	in	disappointment.	Nothing.	Whatever
it	 was,	 animal	 or	 human,	 must	 already	 have	 made	 off.	 Then	 from	 over	 the	 far	 edge	 he	 heard	 pebbles
falling.	 Running	 across	 he	 saw	 a	 man	 in	 brown	 tunic	 and	 baggy	 trousers	 slithering	 frantically	 down	 a
patch	 of	 scree	 to	 make	 his	 escape.	 Reaching	 for	 his	 bow,	 Babur	 took	 careful	 aim	 and	 sent	 an	 arrow
hissing	after	him.	The	man	screamed	but	disappeared	into	some	rocky	ground	at	the	bottom	of	the	hill.
With	Baburi	and	his	guards	close	behind,	Babur	leaped	and	skidded	down	the	stony	hillside	after	his
quarry.	Reaching	the	bottom	he	glimpsed	the	man	half	running,	half	staggering	among	the	rocks,	the	arrow
protruding	from	the	muscle	of	his	right	arm,	just	below	his	shoulder.	Summoning	a	burst	of	speed,	Babur
caught	up	with	him	and	flung	himself	at	him,	bringing	him	down	among	the	pebbles.	Soon	his	bodyguard
had	caught	up	and	pinioned	the	man.
Babur	stood	up,	brushing	the	dust	from	his	clothes.	‘Who	are	you?’
‘Pikhi,	headman	of	the	Gagianis	.	.	.’	the	man	gasped.
‘What	were	you	doing?’
Pikhi’s	eyes	–	elongated	like	a	mountain	cat’s	–	flickered,	but	if	he	had	thought	of	lying,	he	seemed	to
realise	the	futility.	‘Watching	your	progress	towards	the	pass.’
‘And	why	would	you	do	that?’
‘There	 are	 Pathan	 tribes	 in	 the	 pass	 who	 will	 reward	 me	 and	 my	 people	 well	 for	 information	 about
opportunities	for	plunder.	Last	year’s	harvest	was	bad	and	the	winter	has	been	hard	.	.	.	My	people	have
never	been	rich	but	this	year	we	will	starve	unless	I	seek	booty.’
‘I	am	a	king	leading	an	army	.	.	.	not	a	fat	merchant	with	a	camel	train.’
‘Shall	I	slit	his	throat?’	Baburi	drew	his	dagger,	ready	to	inflict	the	habitual	punishment	on	spies.

‘No	.	.	.	I	may	have	a	better	idea.’
Babur	 turned	 back	 to	 Pikhi,	 who	 seemed	 to	 have	 composed	 himself	 to	 meet	 his	 end	 as	 befitted	 a
headman.	‘You	know	these	mountains	well,	and	you	want	to	live?’
‘Yes	to	both,	of	course	–	after	all	I	got	through	your	cordon	easily	enough,	didn’t	I?’
‘In	return	for	your	life,	you	will	send	messengers	to	your	allies	in	the	pass	telling	them	that	I,	Babur	of
Kabul,	am	passing	through.	Any	tribe	that	attacks	me	will	be	annihilated	.	.	.	And	you	will	be	our	guide.
At	the	first	sign	of	trouble,	you	die.	Is	that	clear?’

Sparing	Pikhi	had	been	a	wise	move.	In	three	long	marches	he	had	brought	them	through	the	barren,	snowdusted	Khyber	Pass	with	its	jagged	grey	defiles.	As	they	descended	to	the	mud-brick	settlement	of	Jam,
the	air	was	already	warmer	and	three	more	days	brought	them	to	the	Indus.	Babur	gazed	at	the	broad	river,
so	high	with	meltwater	it	was	almost	overflowing	its	banks.	It	formed	the	barrier	between	his	world	and
the	hot,	mysterious	lands	of	Hindustan	.	.	.
‘This	is	the	Indus,	then?’	Baburi	was	beside	him	on	a	stocky	gelding	that,	eager	for	a	drink,	was	tossing
its	head	impatiently.
‘Yes.’	As	Babur	stared	at	the	swirling,	eddying	waters,	some	of	his	elation	died.	‘We	can’t	cross	here.
Most	of	our	animals	and	baggage	would	never	make	it	.	.	.	we’d	lose	everything.	Send	Pikhi	to	me.	I	must
give	our	men	at	least	some	chance	of	booty.’
Ten	minutes	later	the	man	was	before	him,	brown	felt	cap	in	his	hands.
‘We	cannot	ford	the	river	here.	I	must	wait	for	the	waters	to	fall	or	find	a	place	where	it	will	be	safe	to
swim	our	animals	across.’
Pikhi	shrugged.	‘The	river	is	very	high	this	year	–	it	may	be	weeks	before	the	flow	reduces.	Until	then
there	is	nowhere	else	to	cross.’
‘What	about	boats?	Why	are	there	no	fishermen?’
‘There	were,	Majesty,	but	hearing	of	your	approach	through	the	pass	they	fled	in	their	boats	.	.	.’
Babur	swore.	‘Where	else	can	we	raid	on	this	side	of	the	river	while	we	wait	for	the	waters	to	drop?’
‘Two	days’	march	from	here	is	Kohat,	a	wealthy	place	with	ample	herds	and	grain.’	Pikhi	was	looking
sly.	 ‘The	 inhabitants’	 clan	 is	 the	 blood	 enemy	 of	 mine.	 Last	 summer	 they	 raided	 my	 village	 in	 the
mountains,	 killing	 our	 men,	 stealing	 our	 women	 and	 driving	 off	 our	 livestock.	 Any	 harm	 I	 can	 bring	 on
them	gives	me	only	joy.’
‘Lead	us	there	and	you’ll	have	your	freedom.’

For	the	tenth	time,	Babur	cursed	himself	for	a	fool.	It	was	only	late	April	but	the	heat	was	beyond	anything
he	and	his	men	had	ever	known,	the	air	was	moist	with	the	promise	of	rains	that,	according	to	the	local
people,	would	soon	begin	to	fall.	They	were	all	sweating	beneath	their	armour.
True,	 the	 last	 weeks,	 raiding	 west	 through	 the	 hill	 country	 of	 the	 Afghan	 tribes	 and	 storming	 their
fortified	stone	retreats	–	the	sangars	they	built	high	in	the	mountains	as	carefully	as	an	eagle	constructs	its
nest	 –	 had	 been	 successful.	 The	 erection	 of	 a	 few	 towers	 of	 lopped-off	 heads	 had	 discouraged	 most
opposition	and	at	least	ten	chieftains	had	sworn	their	allegiance,	crawling	before	Babur	on	all	fours	with
grass	between	their	teeth	as	was	their	custom.	It	meant,	‘I	am	your	cow.	Do	with	me	as	you	will.’

Yet	all	he	had	captured	were	sheep,	cattle,	sugar,	aromatic	roots	and	countless	bales	of	cloth.	His	men
appeared	satisfied	but	to	Babur	it	seemed	hardly	worth	the	effort	of	bringing	a	couple	of	thousand	men
and	countless	pack-animals	from	Kabul.	To	his	disappointment	the	Indus	had	not	subsided	until	the	time
had	 passed	 when	 he	 could	 have	 crossed	 it	 and	 penetrated	 Hindustan.	 Subduing	 the	 peoples	 in	 the
mountains	and	plains	along	its	northern	borders	had	been	a	poor	substitute.	Nevertheless,	the	expedition
had	achieved	one	purpose,	Babur	reflected,	wiping	sweat	yet	again	from	his	forehead	before	it	ran	into
his	eyes.	It	had	been	useful	in	schooling	his	troops	–	and	himself	–	for	a	greater	enterprise.
Now	 he	 and	 his	 long	 line	 of	 men,	 the	 pack-ponies,	 donkeys	 and	 camels	 bringing	 up	 the	 rear,	 were
curving	 north-westward	 along	 the	 Ghazni	 river	 towards	 the	 Sawaran	 Pass	 that	 would	 lead	 them	 back
through	the	mountains.	With	God’s	help	they	should	soon	see	Kabul	again	and	feel	the	cool	air	from	the
high	northern	mountains	on	their	chapped,	sunburned	skin.	There,	he	could	plan	afresh.
‘What	 is	 that?’	 Baburi’s	 keen	 eyes	 had	 spotted	 something	 on	 the	 horizon.	 With	 the	 great	 orange	 sun
setting	right	in	their	faces	it	was	hard	to	see,	but	Babur	looped	his	reins	over	the	front	of	his	saddle	and
shaded	his	face	with	both	hands.	He	could	see	something	too	–	a	metallic	sheen	straight	ahead,	probably
an	effect	of	the	light.	But	as	they	drew	nearer	he	saw	it	was	a	great	expanse	of	water	that	seemed	to	hang
between	earth	and	sky.
The	surface	of	the	water	glowed	with	a	reddish	light	that	seemed	to	flash	on	and	off.	The	reflection	of
the	 setting	 sun,	 perhaps?	 No	 .	 .	 .	 Babur	 heard	 Baburi	 gasp	 beside	 him	 as	 he,	 too,	 stared	 at	 the
extraordinary	sight.	Thousand	upon	thousand	of	long-legged,	red-feathered	birds	were	beating	their	wings
as	they	rose	in	flight,	their	bodies	a	streak	of	blood	across	the	livid	sky,	terrible	and	beautiful	at	the	same
time.
Despite	the	heat,	Babur	shivered	with	excitement	.	.	.	These	southern	lands	had	not	finished	with	him
yet.	 Like	 the	 birds,	 he	 was	 leaving	 but,	 also	 like	 them,	 he	 would	 return	 and	 men	 would	 gasp	 at	 the
spectacle.

	
	
	

Chapter	16
A	Fortunate	Birth
	

The	summer	heat	had	scorched	the	grass	in	the	meadows	beneath	the	citadel	of	Kabul	to	a	golden	brown
and	the	ground	beneath	his	weary	horse’s	hoofs	was	baked	hard.	The	level	of	the	lake	had	fallen,	leaving
a	crust	of	cracked	mud	streaked	with	dried	green	slime	around	the	edge;	the	water	smelled	fetid.	After	an
absence	 of	 nearly	 five	 months,	 though,	 his	 first	 thoughts	 were	 of	 his	 mother	 and	 grandmother,	 and	 the
stories	he	wanted	to	tell	them	of	his	expedition	to	the	borders	of	Hindustan.	Ordering	his	commanders	to
pitch	camp,	unload	the	lines	of	pack-animals	and	post	guards	around	the	piles	of	plunder	until	it	could	be
distributed,	Babur	cantered	up	the	ramp	into	the	citadel.
As	 he	 emerged	 through	 the	 shadowy	 gatehouse	 into	 the	 bright	 courtyard,	 the	 drummers	 on	 the
battlements	beat	out	the	customary	welcome	to	the	returning	king.	Babur	eased	his	feet	out	of	the	stirrups
and	grunted	in	satisfaction.	It	was	good	to	be	back.	Then	he	saw	Baisanghar	hurrying	to	greet	him.	His
face	told	Babur	immediately	that	something	was	wrong.	‘What	is	it,	Baisanghar?	What’s	happened?’
‘Majesty,	your	mother	is	ill.	She	has	what	the	people	here	call	the	spotted	fever,	brought	by	merchants
from	the	east.	It	caused	an	epidemic	in	the	town,	which	spread	here	to	the	citadel	to	the	women’s	quarters.
The	hakim	has	bled	her	but	without	result.	Now	he	is	treating	her	with	the	juice	of	watermelons	to	cool
her	 blood,	 but	 he	 fears	 for	 her	 life	 .	 .	 .	 Two	 of	 her	 attendants	 have	 already	 died,	 one	 only	 a	 few	 hours
ago.’
‘When	did	the	sickness	start?’
‘Nearly	a	week	ago.	She	speaks	of	you	constantly.	I	sent	scouts	to	watch	for	your	return	but	I	had	no
idea	from	which	direction	you’d	come	–	or	when.	God	has	been	good	to	bring	you	home	.	.	.’
A	 chilling	 numbness	 crept	 through	 Babur	 that	 seemed	 to	 paralyse	 his	 body	 and	 brain.	 Dazed,	 he	 slid
from	his	horse,	handed	his	reins	to	a	groom	and	walked	slowly	across	the	courtyard	and	up	the	steps	to
the	women’s	quarters.	As	he	approached	the	tall	silver-lined	double	doors,	inlaid	with	dark	blue	lapislazuli,	that	led	into	his	mother’s	apartments,	his	whole	body	was	trembling	and	he	felt	sick.
Scenes	 from	 his	 boyhood	 flickered	 through	 his	 brain.	 Khanzada	 slapping	 him	 for	 tormenting	 her
mongoose	and	Kutlugh	Nigar	reproving	her.	His	mother	setting	the	feathered	velvet	cap	of	Ferghana	on	his
head	and	placing	his	father’s	sword,	Alamgir,	in	his	hand	on	the	night	the	khutba	was	read	in	his	name.
But,	 above	 all,	 he	 saw	 the	 agony	 on	 her	 face	 when	 he	 had	 told	 her	 that	 Khanzada	 was	 to	 be	 given	 to
Shaibani	Khan.	That	had	sapped	the	life	from	her	long	before	the	sickness	had	struck	.	.	.	Babur	bowed	his
head	in	anguish.
As	 attendants	 swung	 the	 doors	 open,	 the	 close,	 heavy	 air	 of	 the	 sick	 chamber	 –	 sweat	 mingled	 with
sandalwood	and	camphor	–	hit	him.	He	caught	the	sad,	sweet	notes	of	a	lute.	As	he	entered	he	saw	Esan
Dawlat	sitting	by	her	daughter’s	bedside,	her	head	bent	low	over	her	instrument.	‘Grandmother	.	.	.’
She	looked	up	at	his	voice	but	completed	the	refrain	she	had	been	playing	before	handing	the	lute	to	a
subdued,	 pinched-looking	 Fatima	 sitting	 just	 behind	 her.	 ‘Music	 seems	 to	 soothe	 her.	 I	 was	 afraid	 you
would	be	too	late.	The	hakim	says	the	crisis	is	near	.	.	.’
Babur	 could	 see	 his	 mother	 lying	 with	 her	 eyes	 closed.	 Her	 face	 and	 what	 he	 could	 see	 of	 her	 neck

were	 covered	 with	 raised	 angry	 red	 spots.	 There	 were	 even	 some	 swelling	 her	 eyelids.	 He	 stepped
towards	 her,	 but	 Esan	 Dawlat	 waved	 him	 back.	 ‘The	 fever	 is	 deadly	 –	 especially	 to	 the	 young.’	 Babur
stared	at	her.	He	took	another	step	forward	but,	with	a	speed	almost	unbelievable	in	a	woman	of	her	age,
Esan	Dawlat	sprang	up,	rushed	towards	him	and	gripped	his	arms.	‘The	hakim	is	doing	all	he	can,	and	so
am	 I.	 We	 can	 only	 wait	 and	 hope.	 Will	 it	 help	 if	 you	 catch	 it	 too?	 The	 best	 thing	 you	 can	 do	 for	 your
mother,	and	for	me,	is	to	survive.’
‘But	is	there	nothing	I	can	do?’
‘There	is	one	thing.	When	your	mother	is	conscious	she	says	little.	But	in	her	delirium	she	says	much.
Again	and	again	she	has	asked	God	why	she	has	no	grandchildren,	why	you	have	no	heirs.	Let	me	tell	her
you	 will	 marry	 again,	 that	 there	 will	 be	 children	 she	 can	 hold	 on	 her	 knee	 when	 she	 recovers.	 All	 she
feels	in	her	soul	is	despair,	leaving	her	no	strength	to	fight.	I	must	give	her	something	to	hope	for	.	.	.’
‘Tell	her	I	will	do	anything	she	asks.	Tell	her	she	must	recover	so	she	can	dance	at	my	wedding	feast
and	that	there	will	be	many	grandchildren	.	.	.	Tell	her	I	need	her	.	.	.’
Esan	Dawlat	scrutinised	his	face,	then	–	satisfied	–	released	him.	‘Now	go.	I	will	send	you	word	of	her
condition.’
Fighting	back	tears,	Babur	made	his	way	to	his	own	apartments.	Esan	Dawlat	and	his	mother	were	right
–	 he	 must	 face	 his	 responsibilities.	 Now	 that	 he	 was	 settled	 in	 Kabul	 it	 was	 high	 time	 to	 take	 another
wife:	his	people	would	expect	heirs	and,	of	course,	marriages	cemented	alliances.	But	that	was	irrelevant
–	if	it	would	help	his	mother	recover	he’d	take	ten	brides,	twenty	.	.	.
The	 next	 days	 passed	 slowly	 as	 Babur	 waited	 for	 news.	 The	 reports	 were	 always	 the	 same	 –	 ‘no
change’.	 He	 had	 much	 to	 occupy	 him	 in	 the	 aftermath	 of	 his	 expedition.	 The	 tribal	 chieftains	 who	 had
ridden	with	him	were	anxious	for	their	share	of	the	booty	and	he	put	Baburi	in	charge	of	working	out	the
allocations.	 The	 court	 scribes	 were	 soon	 recording	 how	 many	 sheep	 and	 goats,	 how	 many	 bales	 of
woollen	cloth,	how	many	sacks	of	grain	were	being	doled	out.
Babur	also	had	his	own	men	to	think	of.	They	must	be	rewarded	with	increases	in	ranks	and	titles,	as
well	as	shares	of	the	plunder.	He’d	make	Baburi	his	new	quartermaster	–	the	post	had	remained	vacant
since	Ali	Gosht’s	dismissal.	That	should	tickle	both	that	prickly	pride	of	his	and	his	sense	of	humour.	But
what	could	he	do	for	Baisanghar,	loyal	for	so	long	and	who	had	governed	Kabul	well	in	his	absence?	If
he	had	daughters	or	nieces	it	would	be	no	shame	for	Babur	to	find	a	wife	from	among	them.	Baisanghar
came	from	an	ancient	family	in	Samarkand	and,	if	Babur	ever	returned	there,	it	would	please	the	citizens.
The	more	he	pondered	the	idea,	the	more	pleased	he	became	with	it	.	.	.	He’d	seldom	heard	Baisanghar
speak	of	his	family	and	certainly	none	had	travelled	with	him	from	Samarkand,	yet	that	didn’t	mean	he	had
none.	So	why	not	ask	him?	Summoning	Baisanghar	to	his	private	apartments,	he	went	straight	to	the	point.
‘I	owe	you	a	great	deal.	From	the	moment	you	clapped	me	on	the	shoulder	in	Samarkand	you’ve	kept	faith
with	me	.	.	.’
‘I	have	always	kept	faith	with	the	House	of	Timur,	Majesty,	and	always	will.’
‘That	is	why	I	have	something	to	ask	you.	My	mother	wishes	me	to	marry	again	soon.	I	have	sworn	to
do	so	–	even	if	she	doesn’t	live	to	see	it	–	and	it	would	do	me	honour,	Baisanghar,	if	I	could	take	a	woman
of	your	house.	That	is	all	I	wanted	to	say	.	.	.’
Baisanghar	looked	stunned.	It	was	the	first	time	Babur	had	seen	the	cool-headed,	unemotional,	slightly
humourless	commander	–	a	man	who,	despite	the	loss	of	his	right	hand,	could	hack	his	way	with	his	left
through	a	parcel	of	assailants	and	barely	blink	–	at	a	loss.
‘I	 have	 a	 daughter,	 Majesty,	 but	 I	 have	 seen	 nothing	 of	 her	 these	 last	 ten	 years.	 My	 wife	 died	 giving
birth	to	her.	After	Shaibani	Khan	killed	your	uncle	and	Samarkand’s	future	seemed	so	uncertain,	I	sent	her
to	my	cousin	in	Herat	for	safety.	She	is	seventeen	years	old.’

‘What	is	her	name?’
‘Maham,	Majesty.’
‘Will	you	send	for	her?	Will	you	give	her	to	me?’
‘I	will,	Majesty.’
‘I	cannot	make	her	my	only	wife.	To	build	the	alliances	I	need,
I	must	marry	others,	but	I	will	always	treat	her	well,	Baisanghar.	I	give	you	my	word.’

‘Majesty,	wake	up.’	At	the	feel	of	a	hand	on	his	shoulder,	Babur	reached	instinctively	for	the	dagger	that
he	kept	beneath	his	pillow	but	then	he	realised	a	female	voice	had	roused	him.	Shading	his	eyes	against
the	light	of	the	candle	the	woman	was	holding,	he	saw	Fatima’s	plain,	round	face.
This	 was	 an	 extraordinary	 breach	 of	 court	 etiquette	 –	 and	 of	 security.	 Then	 his	 heart	 almost	 stopped
beating.	 Fatima	 must	 have	 come	 from	 his	 mother’s	 chamber.	 He	 leaped	 from	 his	 bed,	 oblivious	 to	 his
nakedness.	‘What	has	happened?	How	is	my	mother	.	.	.	?’
Fatima	was	crying	but	they	were	tears	of	joy,	not	grief.	‘The	crisis	is	finally	over	–	the	hakim	says	she
will	live.’
Babur	closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment,	thanking	God.	Then,	noticing	Fatima’s	blushing	confusion	and	that
she	 was	 averting	 her	 eyes,	 he	 reached	 hastily	 for	 his	 robe.	 He	 ran	 along	 the	 narrow	 stone	 passageway,
pushed	 the	 doorkeepers	 aside	 and	 burst	 through	 the	 silver	 doors	 into	 his	 mother’s	 chamber.	 The	 greyhaired	 hakim	 clicked	 his	 tongue	 disapprovingly	 but	 Babur	 didn’t	 care.	 Esan	 Dawlat	 was	 wiping	 her
daughter’s	face	with	a	damp	cloth	and	as	she	turned	to	greet	him,	he	saw	the	relief	in	her	eyes.
Then	Babur	looked	at	his	mother.	Her	once	smooth	skin	was	cratered	and	puckered	with	circular	red
scars	but	her	eyes	were	bright,	and	brighter	still	as	they	rested	on	him.	She	opened	her	arms	and,	flinging
himself	 to	 the	 floor	 beside	 her,	 Babur	 let	 her	 embrace	 him,	 feeling	 the	 years	 roll	 back	 and	 deep	 relief
flood	through	him.

The	cloud	of	dust	billowing	on	the	western	horizon	was	huge	as	was	to	be	expected	with	a	caravan	of
more	 than	 five	 thousand	 camels	 and	 two	 thousand	 mules.	 Maham	 would	 be	 somewhere	 amid	 that	 great
trudging	throng.	Though	he	had	sent	an	escort	to	protect	her	on	the	journey	eastward	from	Herat,	he	had
decided	that,	for	even	greater	safety,	the	party	should	join	the	caravan.
His	bride	should	be	here	before	nightfall.	Her	apartments,	spread	with	rich	carpets,	hung	with	silks	and
scented	with	the	finest	rosewater	and	sandalwood,	were	prepared,	together	with	his	wedding	gifts	–	not
the	 heavy	 gold	 neck-	 and	 armlets	 he	 had	 once	 given	 Ayisha	 and	 that	 she	 had	 returned,	 but	 delicately
worked	chains	and	bracelets	bright	with	gems,	the	choicest	in	his	treasure	houses.	What	would	be	going
through	Maham’s	mind?	he	wondered.	Joy	at	being	reunited	with	the	father	she	had	not	seen	for	so	many
years?	Apprehension	about	the	husband	she	would	shortly	have	.	.	.	?
Babur	was	again	watching	from	the	battlements	as,	just	before	sunset,	with	the	sky	glowing	amber,	the
wedding	party	passed	through	the	gates	of	Kabul’s	citadel	into	the	courtyard.	He	saw	Baisanghar	eagerly
approach	the	enclosed	bullock	cart	in	which	his	daughter	and	her	women	were	travelling.	He	wished	he,
too,	could	see	her,	but	he	would	have	to	wait	for	the	wedding	ceremony	.	.	.
It	took	place	a	week	later	on	a	day	deemed	especially	blessed	by	the	court	astrologers.	He	and	Maham

sat	 side	 by	 side	 beneath	 a	 velvet	 canopy	 while	 mullahs	 recited	 prayers	 for	 their	 happiness.	 She	 was
concealed	beneath	layers	of	embroidered	silk	veils,	the	colour	of	blue	duck	eggs,	flowing	from	beneath	a
cap	of	golden	filigree	worked	with	precious	gems	that	trembled	and	sparkled	when	she	moved	her	head	–
a	gift	from	Kutlugh	Nigar.	As	Babur	took	her	hand	to	lead	her	to	the	wedding	feast	he	sensed	no	hesitation,
no	reluctance,	but	a	responsive	tremor	that	sent	erotic	anticipation	creeping	through	him.
That	 night,	 in	 the	 bridal	 chamber,	 he	 watched	 her	 attendants	 undress	 her.	 Baisanghar,	 reticent	 and
unassuming	as	ever,	had	never	told	him	his	daughter	was	so	beautiful	–	but	as	he	hadn’t	seen	her	since	she
was	a	child	how	could	he	have	known?	Her	oval	face	was	dominated	by	huge	chestnut	eyes	and	her	dark
hair	reached	almost	to	the	curve	of	her	buttocks.	Her	body	was	small	but	rounded.	As	Babur	took	in	the
high,	round	breasts	with	their	pearlescent	sheen,	the	tapering	waist,	the	delicate	curve	of	her	hips,	he	felt	a
possessive	passion,	a	desire	to	protect	at	all	costs.	The	thought	that	anyone	might	hurt	her	made	him	so
angry	that	he	had	to	remind	himself	it	hadn’t	happened,	would	never	happen	–	that	he	was	there	to	look
after	her	.	.	.
The	following	days	seemed	to	pass	as	if	time	no	longer	existed.	His	couplings	with	Ayisha	had	blunted
physical	 need	 but	 nothing	 more.	 Even	 his	 frolics	 with	 women	 like	 Yadgar,	 when	 he	 and	 Baburi	 had
roamed	the	bazaars	and	brothels	of	Ferghana,	had	been	no	more	than	the	taste	of	a	good	meal	or	the	joy	of
the	hunt	–	just	a	passing	pleasure.
His	 grandmother	 had	 no	 need	 to	 urge	 him	 to	 Maham’s	 bed,	 as	 she	 had	 once	 driven	 him	 to	 Ayisha’s.
However	 many	 times	 they	 made	 love,	 just	 to	 look	 at	 her	 with	 her	 hair	 tumbling	 over	 her	 breasts	 was
enough	to	arouse	him	afresh,	to	pull	her	gently	to	him,	run	his	hands	over	the	silken	curve	of	her	hips,	feel
her	body’s	ready	response	and	hear	the	quickening	of	her	breathing,	which	told	him	she	was	as	ready	for
passion	as	he	was.

‘How	is	the	bridegroom?	I	am	surprised	you	don’t	need	the	hakims	services	–	I’ve	heard	he	has	a	good
ointment	for	treating	the	burning	and	chafed	private	parts	of	newlyweds	.	.	.’
‘The	bridegroom	is	well	.	.	.’
‘Is	that	all	you	have	to	say	.	.	.	?’	Baburi	raised	an	eyebrow.
‘Yes.’	Even	now,	a	month	after	his	marriage,	Babur	felt	reluctant	to	talk	of	his	feelings	for	Maham,	even
to	Baburi	with	whom	he	shared	nearly	everything.	Instead	he	turned	the	subject	to	something	else	that	was
preoccupying	him.	‘I	must	take	another	wife,	from	among	the	nobility	of	Kabul.	The	citizens	expect	it	and
it	will	help	bind	them	to	me.’
‘Who	have	you	chosen?’
‘I	haven’t.	I’ve	allowed	my	mother	and	grandmother	to	pick	for	me.	They’re	been	summoning	suitable
candidates	to	the	royal	women’s	apartments	.	.	.’
‘And	looking	them	over	on	your	behalf?’
‘Exactly	And	now	they’ve	decided.	Last	night	my	grandmother	told	me	the	name	of	the	girl	.	.	.	But	what
about	you,	Baburi?	Isn’t	it	time	you	took	a	wife?	Don’t	you	want	sons?’
‘Since	I	was	eight	years	old	I’ve	been	alone	.	.	.	The	thought	of	ties,	of	family,	doesn’t	attract	me.	I	like
variety	in	my	bed	and	the	freedom	it	brings.’
‘You	can	have	as	many	wives	as	you	want.	You’re	a	poor	man	no	longer	.	.	.’
‘You	don’t	understand.	Family,	heirs,	dynasty	–	they	are	a	natural	part	of	your	world.	You	see	yourself
as	part	of	a	story	that	began	long	ago	and	will	continue	long	after	you’re	dead	but	in	which	your	role	will

always	be	remembered.	I	don’t	care	whether	people	remember	me.	Why	should	they?’
‘Surely	 every	 man	 wants	 to	 leave	 his	 mark	 on	 the	 world	 and	 be	 spoken	 of	 by	 his	 descendants	 with
pride	.	.	.	that’s	not	just	something	for	kings	.	.	.’
‘Isn’t	 it?	 People	 like	 me	 fade	 quickly	 out	 of	 history.	 We	 don’t	 matter.	 Let	 me	 ask	 you	 something	 .	 .	 .
What	 have	 you	 written	 about	 me	 in	 that	 diary	 of	 yours	 .	 .	 .	 ?	 Have	 you	 even	 mentioned	 me	 recently?’
Baburi’s	dark	blue	eyes	flickered.
Suddenly	Babur	realised	that	this	was	not	about	fame,	glory	and	kingly	destiny.	It	was	simpler	than	that.
Baburi	was	jealous.	He	was	used	to	being	Babur’s	closest	companion,	his	confidant,	the	one	person	from
whom	Babur	kept	nothing.	Babur’s	passion	for	Maham	had	changed	that.	If	he	was	honest,	he	had	hardly
given	Baburi	a	thought	these	past	weeks,	and	Baburi	–	grown	man,	tried	and	tested	warrior	though	he	was
–	was	hurt.	Something	of	the	vulnerable	market	boy,	fighting	for	scraps	and	confronting	life	with	his	fists,
still	lurked	beneath	the	swaggering,	cocksure	exterior.
Long	ago	Wazir	Khan	had	warned	him	against	his	growing	intimacy	with	Baburi	and	had	admitted	his
own	jealousy,	his	own	sense	of	exclusion.	Babur	found	himself	repeating	almost	the	same	words	he	had
used	to	salve	Wazir	Khan’s	wounded	pride.	‘You	are	among	the	foremost	of	my	ichkis,	my	closest,	most
trusted	adviser	and	my	friend.	Never	forget	that.’	He	touched	Baburi’s	shoulder.
Baburi	looked	at	his	hand	but	didn’t	twist	aside.	It	was	like	taming	a	stallion,	Babur	thought.	Something
of	the	wildness	always	remained,	despite	the	passing	of	the	years.	But	a	softening	in	Baburi’s	expression
told	Babur	that	his	words	had	found	their	mark.	‘So,	tell	me	about	this	next	bride	of	yours.	Who	is	she?’
Baburi	said,	after	a	moment.
‘Bahlul	 Ayyub’s	 granddaughter,	 Gulrukh.	 She	 is	 nineteen	 and,	 my	 grandmother	 informs	 me,	 strong
enough	to	bear	me	many	sons.’
‘So	that	old	fool	of	a	grand	vizier	will	be	your	father-in-law.’
‘Yes.’
‘So	he’ll	have	even	more	op-op-opportunity	to	p-p-prose	on	and	you’ll	have	even	less	excuse	not	to	ll-listen.’
‘He	comes	from	an	ancient	family.	His	ancestor	was	grand	vizier	when	Timur’s	army	passed	through.’
‘That	explains	why	Timur	didn’t	stay	long.	What	does	she	look	like?’
Babur	shrugged.	‘Gulrukh?	I’ve	not	seen	her.	When	the	time	comes	I’ll	do	my	duty	by	her,	but	Maham
will	always	have	first	place	among	my	wives	.	.	.’

On	 a	 cold	 March	 evening	 in	 1508,	 Babur	 was	 on	 the	 citadel’s	 battlements.	 His	 breath	 rose	 in	 frosty
spirals	and	he	pulled	his	fur-lined	robes	tightly	round	him.	The	skies	above	Kabul	–	as	so	often	at	this
season	–	were	clear	and	the	stars	shone	with	such	brilliance	it	almost	hurt	to	look	at	them.	An	hour	ago,	he
had	been	standing	in	this	exact	spot	with	his	astrologer	gazing	skywards	with	him.	‘If	the	child	is	born
tonight,	while	we	are	in	Pisces,	it	will	bring	good	fortune	on	your	house,’	the	old	man	had	said,	mottled
hands	shaking	with	cold	as	they	clutched	his	bundle	of	charts.
Babur	had	dismissed	him	and	all	of	his	attendants	–	even	Baburi.	Until	he	knew	what	had	happened	he
wanted	to	be	alone.	At	least	up	here	he	was	unable	to	hear	Maham’s	agonised	screams	.	.	.	She	had	been
in	labour	now	for	fifteen	hours.	It	had	taken	every	ounce	of	his	self-control	not	to	rush	to	her	bedside	but	it
was	 no	 fit	 place	 for	 a	 man.	 His	 grandmother	 had	 shouted	 at	 him	 to	 go	 away	 and	 leave	 matters	 to	 the
women.	He	had	caught	only	a	glimpse	of	Maham’s	face,	contorted	with	pain,	running	with	sweat,	her	lip

bleeding	where	she	had	bitten	it,	before	the	great	doors	had	been	closed	firmly	in	his	face.
‘It	doesn’t	matter	whether	it’s	a	boy	or	a	girl	–	but	let	Maham	live,’	he	found	himself	praying.	‘And	if
any	must	die	let	it	be	the	child,	not	her	.	.	.’	The	hakims	had	been	warning	for	days	that	the	child	was	large
–	perhaps	too	large	for	Maham’s	slight	frame.
Gulrukh,	 too,	 was	 pregnant.	 Her	 child	 would	 not	 come	 for	 another	 five	 months	 yet	 already	 she	 had
swelled	up	like	a	watermelon	and	looked	healthy	and	well.	But	pregnancy	had	only	made	Maham	ill.	She
had	 found	 it	 difficult	 to	 eat	 and	 instead	 of	 blooming	 like	 Gulrukh,	 her	 face	 had	 grown	 pinched.	 Circles
dark	as	bruises	were	etched	in	the	delicate	skin	beneath	her	long-lashed	eyes.
Baisanghar,	too,	had	been	watching	Maham	anxiously.	She	was	his	only	surviving	child.	These	would
be	difficult	hours	for	him	.	.	.
‘Majesty	.	.	.	come	quickly	.	.	.’	The	woman,	one	of	Maham’s	attendants,	was	panting	and	finding	it	hard
to	 summon	 enough	 breath	 to	 speak.	 She	 put	 an	 arm	 against	 the	 stone	 door	 frame	 through	 which	 she’d
emerged	to	steady	herself.	Babur	felt	as	if	he	was	viewing	the	scene	from	far	away	.	.	.	‘You	have	a	son,
Majesty	.	.	.’
‘What	did	you	say	.	.	.	?’
‘Her	Majesty,	your	wife,	has	borne	you	a	son	.	.	.	She	ordered	me	to	find	you	–	to	tell	you	all	is	well
.	.	.’
‘And	my	wife	.	.	.	how	is	she?’
‘She	is	exhausted	but	she	is	asking	for	you.’	For	the	first	time	the	woman	looked	at	him,	and,	perhaps
because	she	saw	an	anxious	father	rather	than	a	king,	she	shed	her	nervousness	and	smiled.	‘All	is	well,
Majesty,	truly,	and	you	can	go	to	her.’
She	disappeared	back	down	the	twisting	staircase	towards	the	women’s	quarters,	but	he	didn’t	follow
her	immediately.	For	just	a	few	moments	he	raised	his	face	to	the	cold,	pure	sky	above,	seeking	Canopus,
the	sign	of	fortune.	It	had	surely	guided	his	steps	from	the	moment	he	saw	it	beaming,	beacon-like,	beyond
the	snowy	passes	of	the	Hindu	Kush.	There	it	was	now,	shining	brightly.	Babur	gave	silent	thanks.

As	 the	 mullahs	 in	 their	 black	 robes	 and	 high	 white	 turbans	 finished	 chanting	 their	 prayers,	 Babur
showered	tiny	silver	and	gold	coins	from	a	jade	saucer	over	the	head	of	his	five-day-old	son,	lying	naked
on	a	blue	velvet	cushion	in	Baisanghar’s	arms.
‘You	 are	 my	 first-born,	 my	 beloved	 son.	 I	 name	 you	 Humayun,	 Fortunate	 One.	 May	 your	 life	 be
fortunate	and	may	you	bring	honour	and	glory	to	our	house.’	The	tenderness	he	felt	as	he	looked	into	his
son’s	wrinkled	little	face	was	like	nothing	he’d	ever	known.	He’d	wanted	a	son	–	many	sons	–	to	carry	the
blood	line	down	through	the	generations,	but	he	had	never	thought	of	what	fatherhood	would	mean	to	him.
It	was	good	he	had	no	formal	speeches	to	make	–	he	might	not	be	able	to	hold	his	voice	steady	or	keep
back	the	tears	welling	in	his	eyes.
Humayun’s	voice	rose	in	a	thin	wail	as	Babur	handed	the	empty	saucer	to	Baburi	at	his	side.	Lifting	the
child	 from	 the	 cushion,	 he	 held	 him	 high	 so	 that	 all	 his	 courtiers,	 all	 his	 chiefs,	 could	 see	 him	 and
acknowledge	their	new	prince.
Maham,	though	still	weak,	his	mother	and	grandmother	would	be	watching	through	the	carved	marble
grille	high	in	the	wall	to	the	right	of	the	royal	dais	in	Babur’s	audience	hall.	They	would	have	seen	him
acknowledging	the	traditional	gifts	–	silver	coins	signifying	good	luck,	silks,	horses	and	hunting	dogs	from
the	wealthier	nobles,	sheep	and	goats	brought	by	the	tribal	leaders.

The	feasting	and	celebrations	would	last	late	into	the	night,	long	after	Humayun	had	been	returned	to	the
care	of	Maham	and	his	wet-nurse,	a	bright-eyed	young	woman	who	had	recently	weaned	her	own	son.	To
be	 wet-nurse	 to	 a	 Timurid	 prince	 was	 a	 great	 honour	 and	 the	 position	 was	 eagerly	 sought.	 She	 would
guard	her	new	charge	well.
Gusts	of	male	laughter	roused	him	from	his	thoughts.	Back	on	the	blue	cushion	that	Baisanghar	was	still
holding,	a	vigorously	wriggling	Humayun	had	unleashed	an	arc	of	yellow	urine.
‘So	may	he	piss	on	all	our	enemies!’	Babur	shouted,	amid	the	general	mirth,	but	he	had	something	else
to	say.	He	had	not	planned	to	do	it	now,	in	this	way,	but	something	–	a	new	resolve	–	was	driving	him	on.
He	signalled	for	silence.
‘You	have	come	here	today	to	honour	my	son,	to	honour	my	house	–	the	House	of	Timur.	The	time	has
come	for	me	to	claim	Timur’s	title	of	Padishah,	Lord	of	the	World.	I,	with	my	son	Humayun	and	my	sons
yet	to	be	born,	will	prove	myself	worthy	of	it,	and	all	who	support	me	will	share	the	glory.’

	
	
	

Chapter	17
Daughter	of	Genghis
	

Six	 months	 later	 Babur	 sat,	 face	 impassive,	 on	 his	 gilded	 throne,	 his	 courtiers	 erect	 and	 motionless
around	him,	as	Baburi	lowered	the	sack	to	the	ground	before	him.
‘Show	them.’
Taking	 his	 dagger	 from	 his	 blue	 sash,	 Baburi	 slit	 the	 sack	 to	 reveal	 the	 contents:	 two	 heads,	 bloodencrusted	and	mottled	purple-black	with	weeping	putrescence.	The	stench	of	decay	–	sweet	and	rotten	to
the	point	of	nausea	–	filled	the	room.	The	ragged	flesh	where	a	blade	had	roughly	hacked	through	the	base
of	 the	 neck	 suggested	 that	 death	 had	 not	 come	 easily	 to	 the	 two	 men.	 The	 once	 handsome	 features	 of
Sayyidim,	the	young	cup-bearer	whom	Babur	had	helped	hold	down	while	his	frost-bitten	hand	had	been
amputated,	were	only	just	recognisable	in	his	bloated	face.	His	bursting	lips	were	pulled	back	to	reveal
gums	suppurating	pus	above	still	perfect	white	teeth.	As	for	the	other	head,	Babur	had	not	even	recognised
the	man	–	one	of	Baisanghar’s	lieutenants	–	but	his	death,	like	Sayyidim’s,	would	be	avenged.
The	dead	men’s	task	had	been	to	take	a	letter	from	Babur	to	the	King	of	Khorasan,	his	distant	relation,
at	his	court	in	Herat.	Merchants	arriving	with	the	biggest	caravan	to	reach	Kabul	that	season	had	reported
that,	beyond	the	Hindu	Kush,	Shaibani	Khan	was	on	the	move	again	at	the	head	of	a	vast	army.	Some	said
his	target	was	wealthy	Khorasan,	west	of	Kabul,	others	that	it	was	Kabul	itself.	Babur’s	letter	to	the	king
had	been	a	warning	but	also	a	suggestion	for	their	alliance.	Except	that	the	letter	had	never	arrived	.	.	.
Baburi	 had	 come	 upon	 the	 messengers’	 fate	 by	 chance	 during	 a	 routine	 raid	 against	 a	 clan	 of	 sheeprustling	Kafirs.	While	searching	the	mud-brick	huts	of	their	remote	village	he	had	found	the	messengers’
heads	in	a	large	clay	pot	under	a	buzzing	cloud	of	green-black	flies.	The	heads	of	their	ten-man	military
escort	were	nearby.	From	the	account	Baburi	choked	out	of	the	headman,	the	Kafirs	had	tortured	them	for
no	reason	other	than	sadistic	pleasure.	Some	had	had	their	tongues	cut	out,	but	even	more	appalling	was
what	had	they	done	to	one	messenger	who	had	been	slashed	in	the	abdomen	during	the	fight	in	which	they
were	captured.	The	Kafirs	had	put	their	hands	into	the	wound	and	pulled	out	part	of	his	intestine	and,	as
he	screamed	out,	tied	it	to	a	post	and	then	made	the	man	dance	around	it,	unravelling	his	intestines	as	he
went	until	at	last	death	had	mercifully	ended	his	sufferings.
Baburi,	 resisting	 the	 temptation	 for	 instant	 vengeance,	 had	 bound	 the	 headman’s	 ankles	 to	 his	 wrists
behind	his	back	and	rounded	up	all	the	other	Kafirs	he	could	find	to	bring	back	to	the	citadel	in	Kabul.
The	convoy	had	arrived	just	a	few	hours	earlier	and	in	the	dungeons	beneath	the	citadel	it	hadn’t	taken
long	to	force	from	them	a	confession	of	who	had	bribed	them	to	carry	out	such	a	barbarous	act.
Babur	addressed	his	courtiers	in	a	flat,	dispassionate	voice.	‘I	asked	you	to	assemble	here	before	me	to
hear	proof	of	an	act	of	treason.	These	heads	belong	to	my	messengers	to	the	King	of	Khorasan.	They	were
murdered	on	the	orders	of	a	man	of	my	blood,	a	man	I	trusted	.	.	.	Bring	him	in.’
A	gasp	went	up	as	Mirza	Khan	was	led	into	the	room	surrounded	by	guards.	In	deference	to	his	rank	as
a	descendant	of	Timur	he	was	not	bound.	There	was	nothing	humble	or	fearful	in	his	demeanour	or	his
clothes:	a	heavy	enamelled	chain	hung	round	his	neck	and	his	tunic	of	purple	silk	was	secured	about	his
stout	body	with	a	yellow	sash	woven	with	pearls.	His	expression	was	insolent.

Glancing	briefly	at	the	two	rotting	heads	as	if	they	were	no	more	than	a	speck	of	dirt	on	his	red	riding
boots	Mirza	Khan	touched	his	hand	to	his	breast	but	said	nothing.
‘The	men	who	murdered	my	messengers	–	Kafirs	from	the	mountains	–	have	confessed	to	their	crime.
They	name	you	as	the	instigator	.	.	.’
‘Any	one	of	us,	never	mind	villains,	will	say	anything	under	torture	.	.	.’
‘Sometimes	even	the	truth	.	.	.	They	say	you	paid	them	to	seize	the	messengers	–	one	of	them	once	your
own	cup-bearer	–	as	they	entered	the	Shibartu	Pass	and	to	steal	the	letter	they	were	carrying	to	the	King	of
Khorasan.	You	also	told	them	they	could	do	as	they	liked	with	the	prisoners,	provided	their	disposal	was
permanent.	In	their	stupidity	they	kept	their	heads	as	proof	of	this	.	.	.’
Mirza	Khan	shrugged.	‘Kafirs	are	known	for	their	lies	and	deceit	.	.	.’
‘My	quartermaster	found	this	among	their	miserable	possessions.’	An	attendant	passed	Babur	a	shabby
little	 bag	 of	 flowered	 silk.	 Untying	 the	 cord	 at	 its	 neck,	 Babur	 pulled	 out	 a	 small	 plug	 of	 ivory	 with	 a
piece	 of	 onyx	 set	 into	 its	 base.	 ‘Your	 seal,	 Mirza	 Khan.	 The	 craftsmen	 who	 inscribed	 your	 name	 did	 a
good	job	–	see	how	clearly	your	name	and	titles	stand	out.	You	were	a	fool	to	send	a	token	like	that	to
your	hirelings,	but	I	always	knew	you	had	manure	for	brains	.	.	.’
It	 was	 good	 to	 see	 Mirza	 Khan’s	 fear	 beginning	 to	 show.	 Sweat	 was	 running	 down	 his	 face	 into	 his
perfumed	beard	and	dark	stains	were	spreading	visibly	into	the	purple	silk	beneath	his	armpits.
‘What	I	don’t	understand	is	why	you	did	it.’
Mirza	Khan	dabbed	at	his	face	briefly	with	a	lilac	handkerchief	but	remained	silent.
‘If	you	don’t	speak	I’ll	have	you	tortured.’
‘You	can’t	–	I’m	of	Timur’s	house,	your	own	cousin.’
‘I	can	and	I	will.	You	forfeited	your	rights	when	you	betrayed	me.’	Babur’s	cold	words	seemed	to	crush
the	insolence	from	Mirza	Khan.	The	screws	were	twisting	now.
‘Majesty	.	.	.’	It	was	the	first	time	Mirza	Khan	had	addressed	him	so.	‘I	had	no	choice	–	I	was	forced	to
act	as	I	did	.	.	.’
‘A	man	always	has	a	choice.	For	whom	were	you	acting?’
Mirza	 Khan	 suddenly	 began	 to	 retch.	 A	 thin	 trail	 of	 yellowish	 vomit	 spewed	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 his
mouth,	 staining	 the	 purple	 silk	 of	 his	 tunic.	 He	 wiped	 it	 away,	 raised	 his	 head	 and	 looked	 piteously	 at
Babur.	‘Remember,	we	share	the	same	blood	.	.	.’
‘I	do	remember,	and	I	am	ashamed	of	it.	Once	more,	who	is	your	paymaster?’
Mirza	Khan	looked	as	if	he	was	about	to	vomit	again,	but	he	swallowed	hard	and	mumbled	something.
‘Speak	up.’
‘Shaibani	Khan.’
Babur	 stared.	 Then	 he	 jumped	 down	 from	 his	 dais	 and	 advanced	 on	 Mirza	 Khan,	 shook	 him	 by	 his
shoulders	and	yelled	into	his	face,	‘You	have	betrayed	me	to	Shaibani	Khan,	that	Uzbek	barbarian	–	the
enemy	of	all	our	house?’
‘He	promised	to	return	my	lands	that	he	had	captured.	He	promised	me	honour	again	instead	of	being	a
hanger-on	at	your	court.	I	warned	him	you	were	proposing	an	alliance	with	Khorasan.	He	wished	to	stop
it.	 He	 plans	 to	 attack	 Khorasan	 and	 then	 you,	 Majesty.	 Let	 me	 be	 your	 spy	 now,	 Majesty	 .	 .	 .	 Shaibani
Khan	trusts	me.	I	will	send	him	whatever	messages	you	wish	.	.	.	perhaps	we	can	lure	him	into	a	trap.’
To	Babur,	the	man’s	oily	wheedling	was	as	repulsive	as	the	sour	stench	of	vomit	on	his	breath.	He	let
go	of	him	and	stepped	back.	‘Take	this	traitor	and	throw	him	head	first	from	the	battlements.	If	that	fails	to
kill	him,	throw	him	down	again.	Then	take	his	body	to	the	dunghill	in	the	marketplace	so	the	mongrels	that
scavenge	there	can	devour	it.’
‘Majesty,	please	.	.	.’	Warm,	yellow	urine	was	seeping	down	on	to	the	soft	red	leather	of	Mirza	Khan’s

boots,	slowly	forming	a	small	pool	on	the	stone	floor.	Suddenly	he	vomited	again,	and	a	new	smell	told
Babur	that	Mirza	Khan	had	also	lost	control	of	his	bowels.
‘Take	him!’	Babur	shouted	to	the	guards.	‘See	that	my	orders	are	carried	out	at	once.’
An	hour	later,	Babur	rode	out	to	observe	the	execution	of	the	Kafirs.	So	brutal	had	been	their	treatment
of	his	men	that	he	had	ordered	them	to	suffer	a	long-established	punishment	for	the	worst	of	traitors.	They
were	to	be	impaled	on	sharpened	stakes	beneath	the	city	walls.	Their	cries	would	not	reach	as	far	as	the
citadel.	 He	 was	 glad.	 Their	 agonised	 shrieking	 was	 not	 for	 the	 ears	 of	 Maham,	 Kutlugh	 Nigar	 or	 his
grandmother	 although,	 now	 he	 thought	 about	 it,	 Esan	 Dawlat	 could	 probably	 have	 observed	 the	 whole
process	without	flinching	–	as	he	would.
His	contempt	for	Mirza	Khan,	his	anger	with	the	Kafirs	for	their	mindless	bestiality,	banished	any	pity.
He	watched	as	the	condemned	men	were	roughly	stripped	of	their	clothes	and	dragged	to	where	the	stakes
waited.	The	executioners,	wearing	black	leather	aprons	over	their	tunics	–	red	as	the	blood	that	would
soon	 soak	 them	 –	 seized	 and	 impaled	 the	 prisoners	 one	 by	 one.	 Some	 had	 the	 sharp	 stakes	 driven	 up
through	their	anuses.	Others	were	spitted	sideways	to	roars	of	encouragement	from	the	townspeople.	Not
that	Babur	could	condemn	them	–	he	felt	nothing	but	satisfaction	every	time	a	sharpened	stake	penetrated
the	soft	flesh	of	a	writhing	body	and	the	warm	blood	spurted.	He	would	have	liked	to	give	Mirza	Khan	the
same	treatment	–	only	his	royal	birth	had	saved	him.
That	night	Babur	found	it	hard	to	lift	his	mood.	Even	the	sight	of	Humayun	and	his	new	brother	Kamran,
with	his	mop	of	dark	hair,	soft	as	a	dandelion	seed	head	–	born	two	months	ago	to	Gulrukh	and	already
gripping	Babur’s	thumb	hard	–	failed	to	cheer	him.	Neither	could	the	feel	and	scent	of	Maham’s	warm,
willing	body	stifle	his	forebodings.	The	storm	was	coming	whether	he	was	ready	or	not.	The	decisions	he
must	soon	take	would	be	the	difference	between	glorious	victory	and	immortal	fame	or	defeat	and	obscure
death	not	only	for	him	but	for	all	of	his	family	.	.	.

A	month	later,	the	precariousness	of	existence	was	brought	home	to	Babur	in	a	way	he	had	not	anticipated.
Esan	Dawlat’s	body	on	the	bier	seemed	as	small	as	a	child’s.	The	delicate	tang	of	the	camphor	water	in
which	 her	 women	 had	 washed	 her	 rose	 from	 her	 simple	 cotton	 shroud.	 As	 he	 looked	 down	 on	 his
grandmother’s	 body,	 Babur	 didn’t	 conceal	 his	 tears.	 Somehow	 he	 had	 always	 taken	 her	 strength	 and
determination	for	granted.	The	idea	that	she	could	die	suddenly	in	her	sleep,	without	uttering	a	final	word
–	a	command,	a	piece	of	shrewd	advice	–	was	absurd.	But	as	he	thought	back	over	the	past	months,	he
realised	now	that	there	had	been	signs	–	vagueness,	and	an	uncertainty	and	a	tendency	to	fuss	that	she	had
never	 shown	 before.	 Her	 memory	 had	 sometimes	 seemed	 confused	 –	 she	 would	 speak	 to	 Babur	 with
perfect	 clarity	 about	 his	 boyhood	 but	 if	 he	 asked	 her	 what	 she’d	 been	 doing	 yesterday	 her	 face	 would
cloud.
Life	 without	 her	 seemed	 unthinkable.	 In	 their	 most	 desperate	 days,	 she	 had	 been	 the	 lynchpin	 of	 the
family,	the	voice	of	reason	and	common	sense	but,	above	all,	of	courage.	Soon	he	must	face	the	biggest
challenge	of	his	life	without	her.	He	recollected	some	of	her	words	to	him	in	his	youth:	‘Have	no	fear	of
your	ambitions.	Stare	them	in	the	face,	fulfil	them.	Remember,	nothing	is	impossible	.	.	.’
At	a	signal	from	Babur,	three	of	his	grandmother’s	favourite	attendants	–	dressed,	like	him,	in	the	black
robes	 of	 mourning	 –	 bent	 down	 and,	 with	 Babur,	 each	 took	 a	 corner	 of	 the	 bier.	 Hoisting	 it	 on	 to	 their
shoulders,	they	carried	it	slowly	down	the	dark,	winding	stone	staircase	from	her	apartments	–	the	sound
of	sobbing,	led	by	Kutlugh	Nigar,	rising	behind	them	–	across	the	sunlit	courtyard	and	laid	it	on	the	flat,

horse-drawn	 wagon	 draped	 with	 bright	 crimson	 cloth.	 It	 was	 the	 red	 that	 Esan	 Dawlat	 had	 always
claimed	was	the	colour	of	the	ancestor	she	revered:	Genghis	Khan.
Followed	by	his	mullahs,	courtiers	and	commanders,	Babur	walked	behind	the	cart	as	it	carried	Esan
Dawlat	on	her	final	journey.	With	his	mother’s	consent	he	had	decided	to	bury	her	in	his	hillside	garden
among	 the	 fruit,	 flowers	 and	 tumbling	 watercourses.	 When	 she	 had	 been	 laid	 to	 rest	 in	 the	 dark,	 fertile
earth	 and	 the	 final	 prayers	 for	 the	 repose	 of	 her	 soul	 in	 Paradise	 had	 been	 intoned,	 he	 turned	 to	 the
mourners.	‘She	was	a	true	daughter	of	Genghis.	Her	bravery	never	failed	her.	She	believed	to	despair	was
a	sin.	I	will	never	forget	her	and	one	day,	when	I	have	overcome	my	enemies,	I	will	return	to	this	spot	to
tell	her	what	I	have	done	and	to	ask	her	blessing.’

At	least	Esan	Dawlat	had	died	without	knowing	the	terrible	calamity	that	had	befallen	their	royal	relations
in	Herat,	Babur	thought,	a	few	weeks	later,	as	he	tried	to	take	in	what	Baisanghar	was	telling	him.
‘It	 is	 true,	 Majesty.	 Herat	 has	 fallen	 to	 the	 Uzbeks.	 Shaibani	 Khan	 swept	 down	 around	 the	 slopes	 of
Mount	Mukhtar	with	thirty	thousand	warriors.	The	royal	family	fled	into	the	Ala	Qorghan	fortress	but	the
reinforcements	summoned	by	the	king	were	cut	down	before	they	could	reach	them.’
‘What	happened	to	the	family?’
Baisanghar	bit	his	lip.	‘Shaibani	Khan	laid	siege	to	the	fortress	and	tunnelled	under	the	walls	from	the
horse	market	adjoining	it,	causing	part	of	them	to	collapse.	The	Uzbeks	surged	in.	They	killed	every	male
member	of	the	royal	family	down	to	the	smallest	son.	Shaibani	Khan	himself	seized	the	child’s	ankles	and
smashed	 his	 head	 against	 the	 stone	 side	 of	 one	 of	 the	 royal	 tombs,	 spilling	 his	 brains,	 then	 tossed	 him
aside	 on	 to	 the	 corpses	 of	 his	 family.	 He	 ordered	 the	 fortress	 to	 be	 burned	 down	 with	 the	 bodies	 still
inside	.	.	.’
‘And	what	of	the	women?’
‘They	say	those	found	hiding	in	the	Ala	Qorghan	fortress	–	whether	young	virgins	or	bent	grandmothers
–	were	forced	to	strip	and	dance	naked	before	their	drunken	conquerors	at	the	victory	feast,	that	the	Uzbek
chiefs	fought	among	themselves	over	who	was	to	have	the	most	beautiful,	and	that	some	could	not	wait	for
the	feast	to	end	before	publicly	sating	their	lust.’
Babur’s	hands	were	clenched	so	tightly	that	his	knuckles	seemed	ready	to	burst	through	the	skin.	‘What
about	Herat?’
A	look	of	anguish	crossed	Baisanghar’s	usually	calm	face.	‘The	Uzbeks	sacked	it.	Ordinary	men	were
slaughtered,	 their	 wives	 raped	 and	 their	 children	 sold	 into	 slavery.	 My	 cousin,	 who	 cared	 for	 Maham,
was	slain.	Shaibani	Khan	has	also	turned	on	the	city’s	teachers	and	writers.	The	caravan	that	arrived	here
today	brought	a	few	lucky	survivors	from	the	madrasas	of	Herat.	One	–	a	poet	–	says	all	the	manuscripts
in	the	libraries	were	ripped	up	and	Shaibani	Khan	ordered	some	of	the	scraps	to	be	rammed	down	the
throat	of	a	scholar	he	caught	until	he	choked	while	continually	asking	him,	“How	does	it	feel	to	live	on	a
diet	of	poetry?”’
Though	 repelled	 by	 Baisanghar’s	 report,	 Babur	 wasn’t	 surprised.	 From	 the	 moment	 he’d	 learned	 his
messengers	 had	 been	 intercepted	 he’d	 known	 it	 couldn’t	 be	 long.	 What	 would	 have	 happened	 if	 his
warning	 had	 reached	 his	 relatives	 in	 Herat?	 Their	 cultured,	 exquisite	 world	 of	 airy	 palaces,	 ancient
mosques	and	madrasas,	tucked	away	to	the	west,	had	been	ripped	apart	by	a	whirlwind.	Babur’s	father
had	sometimes	talked	of	these	distant	relations,	so	far	away	he	had	never	visited	them.	He	had	mocked
their	love	of	luxury	and	their	obsession	with	beauty,	their	lack	of	manly	aggression	and	fighting	skills,	and

had	 derided	 their	 effete,	 cultured	 court	 where	 a	 writer	 was	 more	 prized	 than	 a	 warrior	 and	 poets
eulogised	not	victory	in	battle	but	the	succulence	of	a	well-roasted	goose	or	the	joy	of	drinking	the	wine
they	called	‘the	water	of	life’.
But	had	they	really	been	so	foolish?	Babur	wondered.	They	had	preserved	their	charmed	existence	until
now.	It	was	a	shock	to	realise	that	with	Samarkand,	Ferghana,	Kunduz	and	Khorasan	all	beneath	the	Uzbek
yoke,	he	was	now	the	only	Timurid	ruler	left	alive.	It	was	a	great	responsibility,	a	sacred	trust.	Whatever
the	 condition	 of	 his	 army,	 whatever	 the	 state	 of	 his	 supplies,	 before	 long	 he	 must	 march	 out	 against
Shaibani	Khan	to	defend	what	was	left	of	Timur’s	world	or	die	in	the	attempt.
The	reports	of	the	Uzbek	mistreatment	of	the	royal	family,	particularly	of	the	women	–	probably	true
though	they	had	a	certain	formulaic	quality	–	yet	again	concentrated	his	thoughts	painfully	on	Khanzada.
Was	 she	 still	 alive?	 He	 had	 long	 comforted	 himself	 that	 she	 was	 more	 useful	 to	 the	 Uzbek	 as	 a	 live
bargaining	 counter	 than	 dead.	 That	 was	 the	 argument	 he	 advanced	 time	 and	 again	 to	 put	 heart	 into	 his
mother.	With	her	own	mother	dead,	now	more	than	ever	Kutlugh	Nigar	needed	to	believe	that	she	would
see	Khanzada	again.	He	could	never	share	with	her	his	darker	thoughts	–	that	Shaibani	Khan’s	desire	to
avenge	 the	 abuses	 he	 had	 suffered	 as	 a	 boy	 in	 Samarkand	 was	 unabated,	 that	 he	 seemed	 to	 glory	 in
humilating	others	and	might	particularly	relish	debasing	a	Timurid	princess.
‘Majesty	.	.	.’	Baisanghar’s	anxious	voice	interrupted	his	bleak	thoughts.
Babur	 drew	 himself	 up.	 ‘I’m	 not	 going	 to	 wait	 for	 Shaibani	 Khan	 to	 bring	 his	 army	 to	 Kabul.	 In	 a
week’s	 time	 we	 ride	 against	 him	 with	 whatever	 forces	 we	 can	 muster.	 How	 many	 troops	 do	 we	 have
already?’
‘About	eight	thousand.’
It	 was	 nothing	 compared	 with	 the	 size	 of	 the	 Uzbek	 horde	 but	 what	 had	 Esan	 Dawlat	 always	 said?:
‘Never	despair	while	you	still	breathe.’
‘I	 must	 bring	 forward	 the	 plans	 I	 have	 long	 been	 forming	 to	 oppose	 Shaibani	 Khan	 once	 more.	 Send
messengers	at	once	–	tonight	–	to	all	the	tribes,	even	the	Kafirs.	Tell	them	that	any	who	come	will	be	free
of	 all	 levies	 on	 grain	 and	 livestock	 for	 five	 years	 and	 that	 I	 will	 pay	 them	 well.	 Tell	 them	 what	 has
happened	in	Herat	and	remind	them	that	Shaibani	Khan	is	the	enemy	of	us	all.	He	destroys	anyone	who	is
not	an	Uzbek	.	.	.’
That	 night,	 with	 only	 Baburi	 for	 company,	 Babur	 climbed	 up	 to	 the	 battlements.	 It	 was	 one	 of	 his
favourite	places	and	usually	brought	him	peace.	In	the	meadows	below,	cooking	fires	glowed	red	in	the
darkness	 as	 shepherds	 and	 travelling	 merchants	 prepared	 their	 evening	 meal.	 Babur	 could	 hear	 voices
calling	and	laughing,	the	bleating	of	sheep	and	the	coughing	of	camels.	Beyond,	Kabul	lay	quiet	within	its
girdle	of	walls.	What	was	going	through	the	citizens’	minds?	The	caravan	trains	pouring	into	the	city	from
the	west	must	be	bringing	as	many	rumours	as	trade	goods.	The	people	must	know	of	the	catastrophe	that
had	overtaken	Khorasan	and	that	Shaibani	Khan	would	soon	be	moving	in	their	direction.
Baburi,	too,	was	sombre.
‘What	are	you	thinking?’	Babur	was	curious.
‘I	was	wondering	where	we’ll	both	be	a	month,	maybe	a	year	from	now	.	.	.’
‘You	mean	you’re	wondering	whether	we’ll	still	be	alive?’
‘Partly,	but	also	what	will	have	happened.’
‘Are	you	afraid?’
‘I’m	not	sure	–	that’s	another	thing	I	was	thinking	about	.	.	.	Are	you?’
It	 was	 Babur’s	 turn	 to	 ponder.	 ‘No,	 I’m	 not	 afraid.	 I’m	 anxious	 but	 that’s	 not	 the	 same	 thing.	 I’m
worried	what	will	happen	to	my	family.	The	world	I	was	born	into	–	the	world	my	father	and	his	father
knew	–	is	changing.	These	past	years,	since	I	lost	Ferghana,	I	have	been	a	wanderer.	Even	here,	though	I

am	 a	 king	 again,	 all	 I	 have,	 all	 I	 am,	 is	 trembling	 in	 the	 balance.	 If	 I	 cannot	 defeat	 Shaibani	 Khan,
everything	I’ve	ever	done	will	have	been	pointless	and	everything	I	want	preserved	will	be	swept	away
.	.	.’
‘You’re	worried	no	one	will	remember	you?’
‘No,	it’s	more	than	that.	I	worry	that	I	won’t	deserve	to	be	remembered	.	.	.’
It	 was	 so	 dark	 now	 that	 Babur	 couldn’t	 see	 Baburi’s	 face	 but	 he	 felt	 him	 gently	 lay	 a	 hand	 on	 his
shoulder	 –	 a	 rare	 gesture	 that	 did	 something	 to	 lessen	 his	 sense	 of	 an	 awesome	 burden.	 Baburi	 was
reminding	him	that	in	the	coming	conflict	he	wouldn’t	be	alone	.	.	.

Babur	brushed	the	sweat	from	his	face	and	slipped	his	feet	out	of	the	stirrups	to	stretch	his	legs.	They’d
been	riding	for	six	long	days	now,	their	pace	inevitably	slowed	by	the	cumbersome	baggage	train	carrying
their	 equipment.	 Soon,	 though,	 they	 should	 be	 approaching	 the	 Shibartu	 Pass	 that	 would	 take	 them
westward	over	the	mountains	towards	Khorasan.	Once	across	the	pass,	they	would	enter	territories	where
they	might	encounter	Uzbek	raiding	parties	.	.	.	but	he	must	be	patient.	There	was	no	way	he	could	tackle
Shaibani	Khan	head-on	in	a	pitched	battle.	He	must	build	confidence	among	his	troops	and	win	new	allies
by	successes	gained	using	the	tactics	of	his	adolescent	days	as	a	hit-and-run	raider	from	the	hills.	He	must
ambush	 enemy	 columns	 and	 disappear	 before	 they	 could	 concentrate	 their	 forces	 against	 him.	 He	 must
capture	isolated	fortresses	and	use	the	booty	and	weapons	within	to	win	more	adherents	until	gradually	he
became	strong	enough	to	take	on	large	formations	of	Shaibani	Khan’s	men.
Reining	 in	 his	 grey	 horse,	 Babur	 called	 a	 halt.	 They	 would	 camp	 for	 the	 night	 on	 this	 steep,	 grassy
hillside,	 with	 a	 commanding	 view	 that	 ensured	 their	 safety	 from	 ambush,	 He	 summoned	 his	 military
council.	They	were	an	ill-assorted	group	–	many	just	tribal	leaders	in	lambskin	jackets	whose	rule	over	a
mud-brick	 settlement	 or	 two	 entitled	 them	 to	 sit	 alongside	 seasoned	 commanders	 like	 Baisanghar.	 With
fewer	than	ten	thousand	troops	he	needed	every	man	willing	to	ride	with	him,	even	unruly	tribesmen.	And
he	needed	them	to	believe	in	him,	despite	the	odds	they	were	facing.
‘In	a	few	days	we’ll	be	over	the	pass.	With	luck,	those	Uzbek	devils	won’t	be	expecting	us.	That’s	our
strength.	They’ll	think	we’re	meekly	awaiting	our	fate	in	Kabul,	like	lambs	in	the	butcher’s	pen.	Until	our
scouts	and	spies	can	tell	us	more,	it’s	too	risky	to	advance	to	Herat	itself.	But	we	are	warriors	of	the	hills
and	 mountains,	 we	 have	 the	 cunning	 of	 the	 wolf	 who	 doesn’t	 rush	 blindly	 among	 the	 herds	 of	 deer	 but
waits,	hidden,	knowing	that	if	he	is	patient	he	can	sink	his	fangs	into	the	flanks	of	a	straggler	and	taste
blood	.	.	.	The	wolf’s	way	must	be	ours.	So,	tell	your	men	to	keep	their	weapons	sharpened	and	oiled	and
to	stay	alert.’
The	 nodding	 of	 heads	 and	 exchange	 of	 glances	 showed	 him	 his	 words	 had	 met	 their	 mark.	 ‘And
remember	the	words	of	the	Holy	Book:	“With	God’s	help,	many	a	small	force	has	defeated	a	large	one.”’

‘About	four	hundred	Uzbeks,	Majesty,	just	three	or	four	miles	away	on	the	far	banks	of	a	river.	It	looked
like	 they	 were	 preparing	 to	 ford,	 spreading	 the	 baggage	 more	 equally	 between	 the	 horses	 and	 packanimals	to	swim	them	over	.	.	.	If	we’re	quick	we	can	attack	while	they’re	still	crossing	.	.	.’	The	scout
was	breathing	hard	and	the	coat	of	his	chestnut	gelding	was	damp	with	sweat.
Babur	 grinned	 at	 Baburi	 and	 Baisanghar.	 At	 last,	 after	 two	 weeks	 of	 edging	 westward,	 of	 keeping

beneath	 the	 cover	 of	 the	 dense	 forests	 that	 clothed	 the	 hills,	 there	 was	 a	 chance	 of	 action.	 The	 Uzbeks
would	be	preoccupied,	securing	their	shields	to	their	backs	and	wrapping	their	bows	and	quivers	to	keep
them	dry.	And	their	other	weapons	–	swords,	daggers	and	throwing	axes	–	would	be	useless	to	them	in	the
water.
‘Baisanghar,	assemble	the	advance	guard.’	With	Baisanghar’s	advice,	Babur	had	selected	five	hundred
of	his	best	warriors	and	divided	them	into	groups	of	fifty,	each	under	its	own	commander.	They	would	be
more	than	enough	to	deal	with	an	Uzbek	raiding	party.	The	rest	of	the	army	and	the	baggage	could	stay
where	it	was	unless	reinforcements	were	needed.
Ten	minutes	later,	with	the	scout	on	a	fresh	horse	beside	him,	Babur	set	out	with	the	vanguard	along	a
sheep	track	leading	through	softly	rolling,	clover-clad	hills	towards	the	river.	Luckily	it	had	rained	in	the
night	and	the	spongy	ground	would	make	it	harder	for	listening	ears	to	detect	the	thud	of	galloping	hoofs.
Even	so,	it	was	good	the	scout	was	taking	them	to	a	point	a	few	hundred	yards	upstream	from	the	Uzbeks
where	a	sharp	ox-bow	bend	beyond	a	plantation	of	willows	should	conceal	their	approach.
Babur	glanced	down	at	the	steel	breastplate	expertly	made	for	him	in	the	foundries	of	Kabul.	His	coat
of	light	chain-mail	fitted	well	and	his	sword	Alamgir	was	at	his	side.	He	was	ready.	The	emotions	surging
up	inside	him	made	him	want	to	yell	his	head	off,	though	he	knew	he	couldn’t	.	.	.	not	yet	anyway	.	.	.
Two	miles	further	on	and	the	track	was	broadening	out	–	Babur’s	men	could	ride	six	abreast	now	–	but
there	was	less	cover.	Babur	frowned,	conferred	briefly	with	the	scout,	then	raised	his	hand	to	halt	his	men
and	summoned	the	youth	he	had	recently	chosen	as	his	qorchi,	his	squire.
‘Ride	 quickly	 down	 the	 column.	 Tell	 my	 commanders	 to	 keep	 their	 men	 at	 a	 trot,	 bows	 and	 quivers
ready	and	their	mouths	shut.	When	we’re	almost	at	the	bend	in	the	river	we’ll	halt	and	I’ll	send	the	scout
ahead.	If	he	reports	that	the	Uzbeks	are	not	yet	across,	we	charge.	Do	you	understand?’	The	boy	nodded
and	cantered	off.
Babur’s	heart	beat	to	a	thunderous	rhythm	as	they	set	off	again.	His	senses	felt	unnaturally	acute	–	he
noticed	the	spiky	black	hairs	on	the	body	of	a	caterpillar	wriggling	along	a	blade	of	grass	and	the	soft,
purple-pink	breast	of	a	wood	pigeon	startled	from	the	tree	where	it	had	been	resting.	The	smell	of	sweat	–
his	own	and	his	horse’s	and	from	the	men	and	animals	around	him	–	seemed	to	rise	in	a	pungent	elemental
cloud,	 the	 essence	 of	 life	 itself.	 Perhaps	 a	 man	 never	 felt	 so	 alive	 as	 when	 he	 was	 about	 to	 be	 in	 the
presence	of	death.
‘Majesty,	you	should	halt	here	while	I	reconnoitre,’	said	the	scout.
Two	 hundred	 yards	 ahead,	 Babur	 caught	 the	 gleam	 of	 water	 through	 the	 trailing	 feathery	 branches	 of
some	fine	old	willows.	‘Very	well.	Be	quick.’
‘Yes,	Maj—’	The	scout	got	no	further	as	a	black-feathered	Uzbek	arrow	pierced	his	cheek	and	a	second
tore	into	his	throat.	A	third	thudded	harmlessly	into	the	ground.	As	the	blood	bubbled	out,	the	man’s	eyes
glazed	and	he	tumbled	from	his	horse,	one	foot	still	caught	in	his	stirrup.
As	cries	to	take	cover	rose	around	him,	Babur	flung	himself	low	over	his	horse’s	neck	expecting	at	any
moment	to	feel	the	cold	tip	of	an	arrow	embed	itself	in	his	flesh.	Gripping	his	reins	in	his	left	hand,	with
his	right	he	reached	round	to	grab	his	metal-bound	leather	shield	and	hold	it	over	his	head	for	protection.
But	 no	 more	 arrows	 came.	 Babur	 cautiously	 raised	 himself.	 To	 his	 left,	 through	 the	 swaying	 golden
willows	–	the	direction	from	which	the	arrows	had	come	–	he	saw	a	trio	of	Uzbek	horsemen	making	off
along	the	bank	towards	the	point	at	which	the	river	took	its	sharp	turn.
Perhaps	they	were	scouts	spying	out	the	land	while	the	others	were	still	crossing.	He	mustn’t	give	them
time	to	get	back	and	raise	the	alarm.	Kicking	his	horse,	Babur	threw	back	his	head	and	yelled	the	order	to
charge.
The	willow	branches	whipped	his	face	as	he	burst	through	and	he	tasted	blood	from	a	cut	in	his	lip.

Reaching	 the	 wide	 bank,	 he	 saw	 the	 Uzbeks	 disappearing	 round	 the	 bend	 and	 cursed.	 Taking	 an	 arrow
from	his	quiver	and	pulling	his	bow	off	his	shoulder,	he	dropped	his	reins.	Half	standing	in	his	stirrups
and	holding	his	horse	steady	with	his	knees,	he	fitted	the	arrow	to	the	string	and	pulled	it	back.	It	sped
straight	and	fast,	embedding	itself	in	the	rump	of	one	of	the	Uzbek	horses.	Babur	heard	its	whinny	of	pain
and	watched	it	skitter	sideways	into	the	river,	taking	its	rider	with	it.	Baburi	had	also	fired	but	the	other
two	Uzbeks	had	vanished.
As	Babur	and	his	close-packed	riders	thundered	round	the	sharp	curve,	turf	flying	up,	his	heart	leaped.
The	two	surviving	Uzbek	riders	were	yelling	and	gesticulating	but	few	of	their	comrades	had	noticed.	A
small	group,	still	on	the	far	bank,	had	seen	that	something	was	wrong	and	were	running	for	their	weapons
but	most	were	in	the	water,	concentrating	on	getting	themselves	and	their	animals	across	the	fast-flowing
river.
Only	 a	 handful	 of	 sodden,	 shivering	 men	 had	 already	 reached	 the	 bank.	 Babur	 and	 his	 troops	 fired	 a
first	 volley	 of	 arrows	 from	 the	 saddle,	 felling	 many.	 Then	 Babur	 gave	 the	 order	 to	 dismount	 and	 to
maintain	 a	 steady	 fire	 of	 arrows	 from	 the	 cover	 of	 trees	 and	 rocks.	 Even	 on	 the	 far	 bank	 some	 Uzbeks
were	falling	to	the	ground	while	in	the	blood-flecked	river	the	bodies	of	dead	and	dying	men	and	animals
were	forming	a	solid,	tangled	mass	that	even	the	current	could	barely	shift.
‘Majesty!’	Baburi’s	clear	voice	rang	out	above	the	screams	and	groans.
Babur	 glanced	 round	 just	 in	 time	 to	 see	 one	 of	 the	 two	 mounted	 Uzbeks,	 whose	 existence	 he’d
completely	 forgotten,	 galloping	 towards	 him.	 Something	 bright	 gleamed	 in	 his	 hand	 –	 an	 axe.	 The	 man
threw	back	his	arm	and	sent	it	whirling	towards	Babur	with	such	force	that	he	could	almost	hear	the	air
whisper	as	it	parted.	Babur	leaped	sideways	as	the	axe	flew	past	his	right	ear	to	stick	in	the	mud	behind
him.
Grunting	he	turned,	yanked	it	out	and	weighed	it	in	his	hand	–	it	felt	good,	well-balanced.	The	Uzbek
was	only	a	few	yards	away	now,	curved	sword	in	hand	and	determination	on	his	face	beneath	his	pointed
steel	helmet	as	he	bent	low	in	the	saddle.	Baburi	rushed	forward.
‘No	–	I	want	him,’	Babur	yelled.	Dropping	his	bow	he	stood,	the	axe	in	his	right	hand,	waiting,	judging
the	moment.	With	the	man	just	a	few	paces	from	him,	Babur	threw	it.	The	shaft	–	not	the	blade	–	smashed
into	the	warrior’s	face,	pulping	his	nose,	but	he	was	still	in	the	saddle.	Babur	felt	the	hot	breath	of	the
man’s	 snorting	 horse	 as	 the	 Uzbek	 bore	 down	 on	 him.	 Throwing	 himself	 forward,	 Babur	 grabbed	 the
rider’s	left	leg	just	above	the	knee.	The	rings	of	his	chain-mail	tore	the	flesh	of	Babur’s	fingers	but	it	only
made	 him	 hold	 on	 tighter	 and	 pull	 harder.	 The	 Uzbek,	 blood	 streaming	 from	 his	 shattered	 nose,	 fell
sprawling	on	the	ground	but	rolled	clear	of	his	horse’s	thrashing	hoofs	and	sprang	up.
He	 and	 Babur	 faced	 one	 another,	 balancing	 on	 the	 balls	 of	 their	 feet	 like	 wrestlers,	 watching	 for	 the
chance	to	make	the	first	move.	If	the	blood-smeared	Uzbek	felt	any	pain	he	wasn’t	showing	it.	His	cold
eyes	were	narrowed,	weighing	up	his	opponent.	Babur	was	wearing	nothing	to	denote	him	as	a	king	–	the
Uzbek	was	just	sizing	him	up	warrior	to	warrior.
Dagger	in	his	left	hand	now	and	Alamgir	in	the	right,	Babur	darted	forward	in	a	feint,	then	jumped	back
nimbly	as	the	Uzbek	lunged.	Circling	his	opponent,	Babur	tried	the	same	trick	a	second,	then	a	third	time.
Each	time	the	Uzbek	reacted,	slashing	with	his	sword	only	to	have	Babur	skip	teasingly	away.	Muscles
tensed,	 Babur	 jumped	 forward	 for	 the	 fourth	 time.	 The	 Uzbek	 hesitated,	 convinced	 that	 Babur	 was	 still
playing	with	him	–	that	he	wouldn’t	follow	through.	But	this	time,	instead	of	leaping	away,	Babur	lashed
at	the	man’s	exposed	throat	with	his	sword	and	kicked	his	right	foot	hard	into	his	groin.	The	Uzbek	slid	to
his	knees,	hands	between	his	thighs,	blood	pouring	from	his	throat.
But	as	Babur	stepped	forward	to	finish	him	off,	his	right	foot	slipped	on	the	sticky	clay	of	the	riverbank
and	he	crashed	down,	dropping	his	dagger	and	trapping	his	sword	beneath	him.	The	wounded	Uzbek	saw

his	chance	of	reprieve.	Pulling	himself	upright,	he	recovered	his	sword	and	lunged	forward.	Babur	raised
his	left	arm	to	protect	himself	and	immediately	felt	a	stinging	pain.	Glancing	down,	he	saw	blood	pouring
from	a	deep	cut	in	his	lower	forearm	and	running	down	so	that	his	left	hand	was	scarlet	and	dripping.
Instinctively,	he	struggled	to	his	feet	and,	as	he	did	so,	twisted	away	from	the	Uzbek	who,	weak	from
his	own	wound,	reacted	slowly.	Freeing	Alamgir,	Babur	drove	the	sword	with	all	his	force	through	the
man’s	 throat	 and	 out	 through	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck.	 Blood	 from	 a	 severed	 artery	 spurted	 over	 Babur,
mingling	with	his	own.
Looking	around,	Babur	saw	the	fight	was	over.	The	Uzbeks	were	either	dead	or	had	fled.	Holding	his
left	hand	high	above	his	head	to	lessen	the	blood	flow,	with	his	right	he	untied	a	cotton	cloth	from	round
his	 neck	 and	 handed	 it	 to	 Baburi.	 Then	 lowering	 his	 left	 arm,	 which	 he	 already	 felt	 to	 be	 stiffening,	 he
extended	it	towards	him.	‘Bind	it	tightly	.	.	.	We	may	need	to	fight	again	today	.	.	.’
The	 euphoria	 was	 already	 leaving	 him	 –	 but	 why?	 Perhaps	 because	 to	 Shaibani	 Khan	 the	 death	 of
upwards	of	three	hundred	of	his	men	would	be	no	more	than	a	mosquito	bite	in	the	night	.	.	.	Babur	would
still	have	to	ride	a	long,	hard	road	before	this	was	over	.	.	.

	
	
	

Chapter	18
The	Wine	Cup
	

Babur	breathed	in	the	familiar	smells	–	the	acrid	smoky	scent	rising	from	the	twigs	and	animal	dung	of
campfires,	the	aroma	of	fat	lamb	roasting	on	spits	and	of	flat	bread	baking	on	hot	stones.	All	around	him,
in	 the	 gathering	 darkness,	 his	 men	 were	 cleaning	 and	 oiling	 their	 weapons,	 laughing,	 cooking,	 pissing,
enjoying	the	rest	after	the	weeks	of	skirmishing.	It	was	good	to	know	that	his	force	had	swelled	to	at	least
sixteen	thousand.	Every	day	men	driven	out	by	the	Uzbeks	were	joining	him.
But	 they	 couldn’t	 stay	 much	 longer	 in	 these	 sweet	 grasslands,	 deep	 in	 the	 mountains	 of	 Gharjistan,
twelve	 days’	 ride	 east	 of	 Herat.	 According	 to	 reports	 picked	 up	 by	 Babur’s	 scouts,	 Shaibani	 Khan	 had
quit	the	city	some	weeks	ago.	The	accounts	were	vague	and	the	exact	timing	of	his	departure	was	unclear
but	all	seemed	to	suggest	that	he	had	ridden	out	through	the	Qipchaq	Gate	at	the	head	of	a	large	force	and
had	appeared	to	be	heading	north-west.	Could	it	be	a	device	to	tempt	Babur	on	to	Herat,	apparently	left
only	 lightly	 garrisoned?	 Or	 was	 Shaibani	 Khan	 planning	 to	 sweep	 north-east	 to	 outflank	 Babur?	 The
Uzbek	leader	would	know	by	now	that	Babur	had	led	an	army	westward	from	Kabul.	He’d	also	know	that
if	 he	 could	 take	 Babur’s	 force	 by	 surprise	 he’d	 crush	 it	 easily.	 Or	 perhaps	 he	 was	 bypassing	 Babur.
Perhaps	 even	 now	 he	 was	 leading	 his	 Uzbek	 barbarians	 through	 the	 mountains	 north	 towards	 Babur’s
capital,	Kabul.
Babur	stared	deep	into	the	glowing	charcoal	in	the	metal	brazier	outside	his	tent.	The	lack	of	definite
news	in	recent	days	seemed	ominous	.	.	.	It	was	as	though	Shaibani	Khan	had	vanished	.	.	.	He	stretched
his	hands	over	the	heat,	frowning	at	the	stiffness	he	still	felt	in	moving	his	left	wrist.	The	wound	to	his
forearm	 was	 healing	 cleanly	 and	 well	 –	 thanks	 to	 his	 hakim	 –	 but	 the	 cut	 had	 gone	 deep	 and	 the	 flesh
round	it	was	numb.	The	loss	of	suppleness	made	him	impatient:	it	was	his	dagger	arm	and	he	needed	it.
That	 night,	 images	 of	 Shaibani	 Khan	 again	 stalked	 his	 mind	 and	 Babur	 hardly	 slept.	 As	 the	 pewtery
dawn	 light	 seeped	 into	 his	 hide	 tent	 he	 was	 still	 turning	 restlessly	 when	 he	 became	 aware	 of	 excited
shouting	 and	 raised	 voices	 coming	 from	 some	 way	 off	 at	 the	 perimeter	 of	 the	 camp.	 Tossing	 back	 his
coverlet	he	leaped	up	and	threw	open	the	flaps	to	his	tent.
‘Find	out	what	that	noise	is	.	.	.’	he	ordered	one	of	the	guards	on	watch	outside.	It	was	probably	nothing
–	a	fight	over	a	goat	or	a	sheep.	Yesterday	he’d	had	five	tribesmen	–	two	Ghilzais	and	three	Pashais	–
flogged	 for	 brawling.	 But	 it	 wasn’t	 that.	 Babur	 could	 tell	 from	 the	 guard’s	 surprised	 expression	 as	 he
returned	at	a	half-run	through	the	lines	of	tents.
‘Majesty,	it’s	an	ambassador	.	.	.	with	a	large	escort.’
‘From	where?’
‘Persia,	Majesty,	from	the	great	shah	himself	.	.	.’
‘Bring	him	to	my	tent.’
Hurrying	 inside,	 Babur	 dressed	 quickly.	 He	 unlocked	 a	 small,	 leather-covered	 chest	 on	 a	 carved
wooden	stand,	took	out	a	jewelled	chain	and	hung	it	round	his	neck,	then	placed	Timur’s	heavy	gold	ring
on	 his	 finger.	 His	 jaw	 was	 rough	 with	 stubble	 but	 there	 was	 no	 time	 to	 do	 anything	 about	 that	 now.
Anyway,	he	was	a	warrior	on	campaign	–	the	Persian	ambassador	must	take	him	as	he	found	him	.	.	.

Five	minutes	later,	Babur’s	guards	ushered	in	the	envoy	and	four	of	his	attendants.	Babur	found	himself
looking	at	a	tall,	black-bearded	man	of	about	forty	in	cream	robes.	A	high	purple	velvet	cap	topped	by	an
egret’s	white	feather	secured	by	an	amethyst	pin	made	him	seem	even	taller.	His	four	attendants	were	in
tunics	of	amber	velvet	and,	like	their	master,	also	wearing	high	caps.	One	held	a	large	purple	velvet	bag
fastened	with	gold	cord.
The	ambassador	made	a	graceful	bow.	‘I	bring	you	greetings	from	the	Lord	of	the	World,	the	great	Shah
Ismail	of	Persia.	He	prays	for	your	long	life.’
Babur	inclined	his	head.	‘I	am	grateful,	and	may	God	grant	him	long	life	also.’
‘It	took	us	many	days	to	find	you,	Majesty.’
Babur	waited.	What	could	the	shah,	away	to	the	west,	want	with	him?
‘My	master	knows	what	brought	you	from	Kabul.	He,	too,	has	been	insulted	by	the	Uzbek	mongrels	who
have	dared	to	encroach	upon	his	eastern	borders.	In	his	arrogance	Shaibani	Khan	led	his	army	from	Herat
and	six	weeks	ago	attacked	a	rich	caravan	bringing	goods	to	our	city	of	Yazd	that	were	destined	for	my
master.	 When	 Shah	 Ismail	 demanded	 the	 return	 of	 his	 goods,	 the	 Uzbek	 sent	 him	 a	 pilgrim’s	 staff	 and
bowl,	 signifying	 that	 my	 master	 is	 a	 beggar.	 In	 return	 Shah	 Ismail	 sent	 a	 distaff	 and	 spindle	 and	 the
message	 that	 Shaibani	 Khan,	 a	 sheep-rustler,	 would	 do	 better	 to	 spin	 wool	 than	 insult	 his	 betters.	 But,
unknown	to	the	Uzbek,	my	master	also	immediately	despatched	an	army	bearing	a	further	message	for	him:
“When	a	wild	dog	foaming	at	the	mouth	attacks	in	his	madness	there	is	only	one	solution.	The	dog	must
die.”	My	master,	whose	magnificent	armies	are	numberless,	has	dealt	with	the	mad	beast	and	he	wishes
you	to	know	it.’
‘Shaibani	Khan	is	dead?’
‘Yes,	 Majesty.	 Seventeen	 thousand	 Persian	 cavalry	 ambushed	 his	 main	 army	 as	 it	 was	 returning
towards	Herat	and	annihilated	it.’
Babur’s	 mind	 was	 racing.	 If	 this	 was	 true	 .	 .	 .	 He	 searched	 the	 envoy’s	 face,	 whose	 long,	 dark	 eyes
reminded	him	of	Ayisha’s	people,	the	Mangligh.
‘Majesty,’	the	man	bowed	again	but	clearly	had	more	of	importance	to	say,	‘my	master	has	charged	me
to	deliver	this	gift	to	you.’	He	took	the	purple	velvet	bag	from	the	attendant	and	pulled	out	an	oval	object
mounted	in	gold.	‘It	is	not	as	richly	decorated	as	my	master	would	have	wished	but	there	was	little	time.
He	hopes	you	will	find	it	acceptable.’	He	held	out	the	object	carefully	in	both	hands.
Babur	examined	it	curiously.	It	was	shaped	like	a	large,	round	drinking	cup.	The	outside,	smooth	and
gleaming,	looked	as	though	it	had	been	dipped	in	liquid	gold	and	on	the	bottom	were	four	little	golden
prongs	on	which	it	could	rest.	The	inside	was	pale	grey	and	–	Babur	ran	a	finger	over	it	–	hard.	Horn,
perhaps?	No,	it	didn’t	have	the	warmth,	the	mellowness	of	horn.	It	was	bone	.	.	.	Babur	looked	again	at
the	round	shape,	the	size	.	.	.	Big	as	the	crown	of	a	man’s	head	.	.	.
‘Yes,	Majesty.	It	is	the	skull	of	Shaibani	Khan,	boiled	clean	of	its	flesh	and	made	into	a	drinking	cup.
The	 skin	 was	 also	 put	 to	 use.	 My	 master	 had	 it	 stuffed	 with	 straw	 and	 sent	 as	 a	 curiosity	 to	 his	 ally
Bayazid,	Sultan	of	Ottoman	Turkey.’
Babur	found	it	hard	to	believe	what	he	was	hearing.	His	greatest	enemy	was	dead	and	he	was	holding
his	skull	in	his	hands.	Babur	looked	down	at	it	but	as	he	did	so	something	of	his	exultation	faded.	He	had
wanted	to	kill	Shaibani	Khan	himself,	to	ignite	fear	in	the	cold	eyes	he’d	never	seen	at	close	quarters,	to
tell	him,	as	he	plunged	his	sword	or	his	dagger	into	his	guts,	that	this	was	for	Khanzada.	Instead	someone
else,	a	far	richer,	more	powerful	ruler,	had	done	it	.	.	.
‘I	am	grateful	to	Shah	Ismail	for	his	.	.	.	gift.’
‘My	 master	 has	 sent	 further	 gifts	 for	 you.	 They	 are	 outside.	 If	 you	 will	 allow	 me	 to	 lead	 you,	 I	 will
show	you.’

‘Very	well.’
Babur’s	 guards,	 weapons	 ready	 in	 case	 the	 Persian	 emissary	 had	 intended	 harm	 to	 Babur,	 parted	 to
allow	them	out	of	the	tent.	As	they	made	their	way	through	the	camp	some	men	who	had	not	heard	of	the
Persians’	 arrival	 were	 yawning,	 scratching	 and	 going	 about	 their	 morning	 ablutions.	 Several	 hundred
yards	beyond	the	perimeter	of	the	camp,	beneath	a	grove	of	oak	trees,	the	rest	of	the	ambassador’s	men	–
as	well	armed	as	they	were	dressed	–	were	waiting.	Their	hobbled	horses	were	grazing	beneath	the	trees
or	drinking	from	a	nearby	stream.	However,	one	horse	–	a	stallion	with	a	long	back,	powerful	flanks	and
shining	 coal-black	 coat	 –	 was	 moving	 restlessly	 between	 two	 grooms,	 who	 were	 having	 difficulty
controlling	it	as	it	jerked	its	head	and	snorted	through	dilated	nostrils.	It	was	the	most	magnificent	beast
Babur	had	ever	seen.
‘This	is	Sohrab,	a	stud	stallion	from	the	stables	of	my	master	who	sends	him	to	you	–	and	the	mares	of
Kabul	–	as	a	gift.’
‘I	thank	the	shah	for	his	generosity.’	Babur	was	puzzled.	Shaibani’s	skull	made	some	sort	of	sense	but
why	should	the	shah	make	him	a	present	like	this?	What	did	he	want	from	him?	Persia	was	not	only	one	of
the	 earth’s	 most	 powerful	 nations,	 it	 was	 a	 wealthy	 centre	 of	 culture,	 its	 poets	 and	 painters	 celebrated
everywhere.	 Both	 Ferghana	 and	 Samarkand	 had	 been	 too	 far	 from	 its	 borders	 for	 any	 direct	 contact
between	their	rulers	but	now	Babur	was	in	Kabul	the	two	lands	were	almost	neighbours.	Shah	Ismail	was
a	 strong	 new	 ruler	 who,	 a	 few	 years	 previously,	 had	 deposed	 the	 previous	 dynasty	 and	 established	 his
own.	A	devout	man,	he	had	also	imposed	the	Shia	form	of	the	Muslim	faith	on	his	subjects.	Some	called
the	Shiites	heretics,	since	they	believed	–	unlike	the	majority	of	Muslims,	including	Babur,	who	followed
the	Sunnis	–	that	only	the	Prophet	Muhammad’s	cousin	and	son-in-law,	Ali,	was	his	rightful	heir	.	.	.	But
the	shah’s	faith	seemed	scarcely	relevant	to	his	gift	.	.	.	Babur	pulled	himself	from	his	reverie.
The	emissary	was	looking	at	him	almost	slyly.	‘And	this	is	also	a	gift	from	my	master.’	Beyond	Sohrab,
Babur	could	see	a	large	bullock	cart,	drawn	by	a	team	of	six	creamy-coated	oxen,	its	contents	concealed
by	yellow	hangings,	bright	as	the	yellow	of	Ferghana.	Ferghana	.	.	.
Babur	 walked	 slowly	 towards	 it,	 his	 breathing	 suddenly	 ragged.	 Though	 the	 air	 was	 cool,	 he	 was
sweating.	He	knew	what	or	rather	who	was	in	the	cart	–	or	hoped	he	did	–	but	never	in	all	his	twentyseven	years	had	he	felt	as	fearful	as	he	did	now.	Reaching	the	cart,	whose	driver	knelt	respectfully	before
him,	 Babur	 paused.	 Slowly	 he	 put	 out	 a	 hand	 to	 touch	 the	 hangings,	 feeling	 for	 the	 opening.	 Then	 he
paused	and	looked	round	at	the	group	gathered	close	behind	him	–	the	Persians,	his	own	men.
‘Step	 back.’	 His	 voice	 was	 sharp.	 He	 waited	 till	 they	 were	 a	 good	 few	 paces	 away,	 then	 took	 the
hangings,	 pulled	 them	 apart	 and	 peered	 inside.	 In	 the	 far	 corner,	 against	 the	 cushions,	 a	 woman	 was
hidden	 by	 a	 heavy	 black	 veil.	 As	 a	 shaft	 of	 sunlight	 fell	 on	 her,	 a	 tremor	 seemed	 to	 run	 through	 her.
‘Khanzada	.	.	.	?’	Babur’s	voice	was	a	whisper.
He	jumped	into	the	cart	and	closed	the	hangings	behind	him.	In	the	half-light	filtering	through	the	thin
silk,	he	saw	the	woman	move	a	little	towards	him.	Unable	to	restrain	himself,	he	reached	out,	took	hold	of
the	veil	and	pulled	it	from	her.	Khanzada’s	brown	eyes	looked	into	his	.	.	.

Fifteen	minutes	later,	Babur	climbed	out	again.	With	so	many	eyes	upon	them,	even	in	the	privacy	of	the
cart,	this	was	not	the	moment	to	open	their	hearts.	Babur	was	not	even	sure	he	could	–	this	had	happened
so	suddenly,	so	unexpectedly	he	could	still	hardly	comprehend	it.	He	summoned	the	emissary	to	his	side.
‘Your	master	has	done	me	a	very	great	service,’	he	said	simply.

‘We	 have	 treated	 your	 sister	 with	 every	 honour	 due	 to	 her.	 Two	 attendants	 have	 been	 with	 her
throughout	the	journey	and	will	remain	to	serve	her,	if	you	so	wish.’
Babur	nodded.	‘You	are	our	honoured	guests.	I	will	order	tents	to	be	pitched	for	you	and	your	people
near	my	own	in	the	centre	of	the	camp.’
It	was	hard	not	to	be	able	to	be	alone	with	Khanzada	at	once,	but	courtesy	to	the	shah	demanded	that
Babur	 play	 host	 to	 the	 Persians.	 As	 soon	 as	 he	 had	 arranged	 living	 quarters	 for	 his	 sister	 and	 for	 the
Persians,	he	ordered	a	pavilion	to	be	constructed	from	ten	hide	tents	and	spread	with	sheepskins	where	he
could	hold	a	feast.	To	sophisticated	Persian	eyes	his	hospitality	would	no	doubt	seem	poor	and	primitive,
but	he	could	compensate	for	the	lack	of	fine	carpets,	ornate	dishes	and	rich	hangings	with	roasted	sheep
and	the	barrels	of	strong	wine	his	men	had	seized	during	their	raids.
Two	hours	into	the	feast,	Babur	congratulated	himself.	The	emissary,	cheeks	flushed	and	eyes	bright,
was	already	far	gone,	muttering	verse	couplets	through	his	black	beard.	Soon,	his	head	began	to	nod,	his
dark	eyes	closed	and	he	slipped	lower	on	his	cushion.
The	celebrations	would	go	on	far	into	the	night	throughout	the	camp.	The	Uzbek	defeat	and	the	death	of
Shaibani	 Khan	 were	 welcome	 news	 to	 all.	 Hatred	 of	 the	 Uzbeks	 had	 united	 even	 those	 who	 would
otherwise	be	enemies	but	Babur	was	free	at	last.	Waving	away	the	guards	who	automatically	formed	up
behind	 him,	 he	 ran	 through	 the	 camp,	 sidestepping	 drunken,	 singing	 men	 and	 ignoring	 their	 roars	 of
invitation	to	join	him	at	their	fires.
Khanzada’s	 tent	 had	 been	 erected	 in	 a	 secluded	 area	 of	 the	 camp	 and	 she	 was	 sitting	 cross-legged,
alone,	at	a	low	table,	writing	by	the	light	of	oil	lamps.	As	soon	as	she	saw	him	she	rose.	In	the	flickering
light	she	was	still	the	young	woman	he	remembered	from	nine	years	ago,	but	as	he	came	closer	he	saw
lines	on	her	face	he	didn’t	recall	and	a	white	scar	running	from	the	right	corner	of	her	mouth	towards	the
tip	of	her	right	ear	he’d	not	noticed	earlier.
‘I	was	writing	to	our	mother	.	.	.	the	first	letter	I’ve	been	able	to	send	her	for	so	many	years.	Come	and
sit	by	me	.	.	.’
‘Khanzada	.	.	.’	He	was	bursting	with	the	need	to	tell	her	how	sorry	he	was	.	.	.	how	bitterly	he	felt	all
those	years	when	she’d	been	a	helpless	prisoner,	how	guilty	that	he	had	been	powerless	to	do	anything	.	.	.
but	somehow	now	he	had	the	opportunity	the	words	wouldn’t	come.	Only	when	she	reached	out	and	gently
stroked	his	face	did	his	tongue	free	itself.	‘I	should	have	protected	you	better.	I	was	young	and	arrogant
.	.	.	I	should	have	used	my	head	.	.	.	I	should	never	have	let	him	take	you	.	.	.’
‘There	was	nothing	you	could	have	done.	It	was	the	only	way	or	he	would	have	murdered	us	all,	right
there	in	front	of	the	walls	of	Samarkand.	My	greatest	fear	was	always	that	you	would	do	something	rash,
something	foolish	.	.	.’
‘I	should	have.	There	would	have	been	more	honour	in	it.’
‘No	–	it	was	your	duty	to	be	prudent	.	.	.	to	wait	.	.	.’
‘You	sound	like	our	grandmother.’
Khanzada’s	 eyes	 filled	 with	 tears.	 Her	 first	 questions	 to	 him	 had	 been	 for	 news	 of	 her	 mother	 and
grandmother	 and	 Babur	 had	 had	 to	 tell	 her	 the	 old	 lady	 was	 dead.	 ‘If	 I	 am	 like	 her,	 I’m	 glad.	 She
understood	the	world	as	it	is	–	not	as	we’d	like	it	to	be	–	and	she	taught	us	what	was	expected	of	us.’
‘Sometimes	I	wish	we’d	not	been	born	who	we	are	.	.	.’
‘Of	course.	Yet	if	you	could	choose	again,	you	wouldn’t	want	it	otherwise	–	not	in	your	heart	.	.	.’
As	Babur	stared	at	the	floor,	the	red	and	blue	flowers	on	the	carpet	seemed	to	whirl	before	his	eyes.
‘But	if	you	hadn’t	been	a	Timurid	princess	you	wouldn’t	have	had	to	endure	Shaibani	Khan	.	.	.’
A	tremor	crossed	Khanzada’s	face.
He	 reached	 out	 to	 touch	 the	 curve	 of	 her	 cheek,	 then	 the	 scar	 etched	 on	 her	 skin.	 ‘What	 happened	 to

you?	Can	you	tell	me	.	.	.	?’
‘He	was	a	strange	man,	always	unpredictable,	often	needlessly	cruel	.	.	.	He	was	not	.	.	.	gentle	and	he
made	me	do	degrading	things	.	.	.	to	humble	me,	he	said,	to	make	me	forget	my	Timurid	blood,	to	remind
me	I	was	only	a	woman	subject	to	his	whims	.	.	.	I	–	I	cannot	speak	of	them	but	they	are	over	now.’	Her
voice	trembled.	‘But	I	was	only	one	of	many	in	his	harem	and	I	was	lucky	to	be	one	of	his	wives.	We	had
a	 certain	 status	 –	 all	 his	 wives	 were	 from	 noble	 houses	 .	 .	 .	 However	 badly	 he	 treated	 us	 in	 the
bedchamber	 we	 had	 rich	 clothes,	 jewels,	 good	 food,	 servants.	 We	 were	 symbols	 of	 his	 power	 and
conquests	 .	 .	 .	 He	 didn’t	 take	 us	 with	 him	 on	 campaign	 but	 left	 us	 where	 we’d	 be	 safe.	 If	 we’d	 been
captured	and	dishonoured,	he	would	have	been	dishonoured	too.	That	was	why	the	shah’s	men	found	me
in	Herat	.	.	.
‘His	 concubines	 –	 there	 were	 hundreds	 –	 were	 not	 so	 fortunate.	 When	 he	 went	 on	 expeditions,	 he’d
select	some	to	go	with	him	to	dance	for	him	in	the	camp	at	night	and	give	to	his	warriors	who’d	fought
well.	If	they	angered	him	he	had	them	killed.	In	one	of	his	camps	a	girl	who	stumbled	as	she	danced	was
buried	up	to	her	armpits	in	sand	and	left	without	water	under	the	hot	sun.	They	say	she	was	still	alive,	skin
and	lips	blackened	and	peeling,	when	his	army	rode	on	two	days	later	.	.	.	Such	things	meant	nothing	to
Shaibani	Khan.’
Khanzada’s	 calm,	 matter-of-fact	 tone	 –	 there	 was	 no	 anger,	 no	 bitterness	 –	 amazed	 Babur.	 From
somewhere	she	had	found	strength	to	accept	her	situation.
‘I	don’t	understand	.	.	.’	he	began,	but	she	hushed	him	as	if	he	were	still	her	childish	small	brother	and
put	a	finger	to	his	lips.
‘Just	as	your	duty	was	to	be	patient,	mine	was	to	survive.	That	was	what	I	did.	I	hid	my	thoughts	and
feelings.	 I	 was	 submissive	 and	 unresisting	 –	 dutiful,	 even.	 Sometimes	 I	 even	 pitied	 him.	 There	 was	 no
happiness,	 no	 contentment	 in	 him,	 only	 a	 restless	 hunger	 for	 revenge	 against	 a	 world	 he	 thought	 had
treated	him	badly	.	.	.’
‘But	you	must	have	been	afraid,	living	in	the	power	of	a	man	who	hated	our	family	so	much?’
‘Sometimes,	of	course.	His	moods	were	strange,	impossible	to	read.	But	as	time	passed,	I	grew	less
fearful	that	my	life	was	at	risk,	at	least	not	from	him	.	.	.’
‘From	who,	then	.	.	.	?’
Khanzada	looked	down	at	her	clasped	hands	with	their	intricate	hennaed	patterning.	Even	as	a	girl	she
had	loved	to	decorate	her	hands	and	feet.	‘Some	of	the	other	women.	Though	Shaibani	Khan	was	what	he
was,	there	was	still	jealousy.	He	was	handsome,	powerful.	He	could	be	generous	to	those	who	pleased
him.	Women	vied	for	his	attention	.	.	.	One	in	particular	was	envious	of	me	though	she	had	no	reason	.	.	.’
‘Who?’
‘The	 daughter	 of	 the	 grand	 vizier	 of	 Samarkand	 –	 the	 young	 woman	 you	 sent	 to	 be	 the	 wife	 of	 our
cousin	Mahmud	Khan.	After	Shaibani	Khan	had	killed	him,	he	took	her	from	Samarkand	as	a	concubine.
She	wanted	to	be	one	of	his	wives	and	hated	me	because	I	was.	But,	above	all,	she	hated	me	because	you
had	her	father	killed.	Six	months	after	Shaibani	Khan	took	me,	she	tried	to	stab	me	.	.	.	She	was	aiming	for
my	eyes	but	one	of	the	harem	guards	saw	her	in	time	and	dragged	her	off	me,	but	the	blade	still	caught	the
side	of	my	face.’	Khanzada	put	her	hand	to	the	scar.
In	his	mind’s	eye	Babur	saw	the	slender,	fiery-eyed	girl	begging	him	for	the	life	of	her	despicable	cur
of	a	father.	‘What	happened	to	her?’
‘Shaibani	Khan	had	her	walled	up	alive	in	an	underground	chamber	in	the	Kok	Saray	in	Samarkand.	He
said	he	was	the	only	arbiter	of	who	lived	and	died.	He	said	he	was	punishing	her	for	her	presumption	.	.	.’
As	 the	 hours	 of	 the	 night	 passed	 and	 his	 sister	 continued	 to	 speak	 of	 her	 ordeal,	 Babur	 began	 to
understand	how	she	had	managed	to	survive	and	to	stay	sane.	It	was	as	if	she	had	distanced	herself	from

everything,	convincing	herself	that	the	traumatic	things	happening	around	her	–	to	her	–	were	happening	to
someone	else.	A	little	like	Ayisha,	but	with	far	more	reason	than	she	had	ever	had,	she	had	longed	to	be
elsewhere	and,	in	her	mind,	had	persuaded	herself	she	was.
It	 moved	 him	 almost	 unbearably	 to	 see	 her	 smile	 but	 he	 was	 also	 filled	 with	 pride	 by	 her	 strength.
Whatever	had	been	done	to	her	body	she’d	refused	to	allow	her	mind	to	be	cowed	and	dominated.	If	Esan
Dawlat	had	been	a	true	daughter	of	Genghis,	then	so	was	Khanzada	.	.	.	Her	experiences,	horrific	as	they
must	have	been,	had	not	destroyed	her.	She	was	thirty-one	years	old	and	had	spent	nearly	a	third	of	her
life	 subject	 to	 the	 whims	 of	 a	 brutal	 tyrant,	 but	 the	 girl	 who’d	 played	 with	 her	 pet	 mongoose	 had
somehow,	inexplicably,	survived.	Tears	pricked	his	eyelids	but	he	forced	them	back.	From	now	on,	his
sister	would	know	nothing	but	happiness	.	.	.

‘The	Lord	of	the	World	has	a	proposition	that	he	hopes	you	will	find	acceptable.’	The	Persian	envoy	was
clad	 even	 more	 gorgeously	 today	 in	 robes	 of	 bright	 orange	 and	 his	 beard	 was	 perfectly	 combed	 and
perfumed.	There	was	no	sign	of	the	aching	head	Babur	had	been	sure	he’d	be	suffering	from.	The	man’s
self-possessed,	 rather	 patronising	 expression	 suggested	 the	 ‘proposition’	 was	 something	 Babur	 would
grab	as	a	starving	man	would	seize	a	hunk	of	bread.
Babur	waited,	eyes	a	little	narrowed.	At	last	he	was	about	to	find	out	why	the	shah	had	gone	to	so	much
trouble	to	please	him.
‘Shah	Ismail	has	shattered	the	power	of	the	Uzbek	marauder.	He	wishes	the	legitimate	rulers	to	return
to	their	kingdoms	so	that	the	lands	bordering	his	great	empire	are	tranquil	once	more.	As	the	last	surviving
prince	of	the	House	of	Timur	he	offers	you	Samarkand	.	.	.’
Babur	 felt	 his	 stomach	 contract.	 Samarkand,	 city	 of	 his	 dreams,	 Timur’s	 capital.	 ‘Your	 master	 is
gracious,’	 he	 replied	 cautiously,	 then	 waited.	 If	 he	 had	 learned	 anything	 in	 the	 years	 since	 his	 father’s
death	it	was	patience.	Let	others	fill	silences	.	.	.
The	envoy	cleared	his	throat.	Here	it	comes,	Babur	thought.
‘Though	Shaibani	Khan	has	been	defeated,	Uzbek	tribes	still	hold	Samarkand.	My	lord	will	give	you
Persian	troops	to	fight	side	by	side	with	your	own	to	drive	them	out.’
‘And	then?’
‘My	master	admires	you.	He	knows	that	the	blood	of	conquerors	runs	in	your	veins.	He	believes	you
would	make	a	worthy	vassal.’
‘A	vassal?’	Babur	stared	at	the	man.
The	 envoy	 seemed	 to	 read	 his	 mind.	 ‘You	 need	 pay	 no	 tribute	 and	 you	 alone	 would	 govern	 in
Samarkand.	All	my	master	asks	is	that	you	acknowledge	him	as	your	overlord.’
‘And	as	soon	as	we	have	taken	Samarkand	the	Persian	troops	will	withdraw?’
‘Of	course.’
‘And	there	are	no	other	conditions?’
‘No,	Majesty.’
‘I	will	consider	what	you	have	said	and	give	you	an	answer	when	I	am	ready.’
The	envoy	bowed	and	withdrew.	No	wonder	the	man	had	asked	for	a	private	audience.	His	proposition
was	 unprecedented.	 No	 Timurid	 prince	 had	 ever	 been	 subject	 to	 Persia	 .	 .	 .	 yet	 the	 suggestion	 offered
security	for	the	shah	and	himself.	The	shah’s	borders	would	be	protected	by	the	friendly	buffer	of	Babur’s
lands,	and	Babur	would	regain	Samarkand.	Established	there,	he	could	bide	his	time,	build	up	his	forces,

seek	 opportunities	 for	 further	 conquests	 and	 perhaps,	 when	 the	 moment	 was	 right,	 throw	 off	 the
vassalship.
He	heard	voices	outside	and	one	of	his	guards	ducked	into	the	tent.	‘The	quartermaster	wishes	to	see
you.’
Babur	nodded.	It	would	be	good	to	talk	this	over	with	Baburi	before	he	summoned	his	war	council.
‘Well,	what	did	he	want?’	Baburi	perched	on	a	low	wooden	stool	next	to	Babur.
‘The	gift	of	the	stallion	and	the	return	of	my	sister	were	to	sweeten	me.	The	Shah	of	Persia	has	made
me	an	offer.	He	will	give	me	troops	to	chase	the	remaining	Uzbeks	out	of	Samarkand	and	establish	my
rule	there	on	the	single	condition	that	I	acknowledge	him	as	my	overlord.’
Baburi’s	indigo	eyes	flashed	in	surprise.	‘Samarkand	is	not	the	shah’s	to	dispose	of	.	.	.	What	right	has
he	to	it?	And	what	right	has	he	to	expect	you	to	be	his	vassal?’
‘He	is	one	of	the	most	powerful	rulers	on	earth.	He	disposed	of	Shaibani	Khan	.	.	.	a	task	that	might
have	taken	us	years	.	.	.	that	we	might	never	have	accomplished	.	.	.’	Babur	said	slowly.
‘You	don’t	mean	to	accept?’
‘Why	not?	I’ve	always	wanted	Samarkand	–	desired	it	above	everything	else.	And	once	I’ve	regained
it,	I	can	retake	Ferghana.	With	the	kingdom	of	Kabul,	I’ll	have	the	makings	of	an	empire	of	my	own	.	.	.
something	to	leave	to	my	sons	.	.	.’
‘That	primping	Persian	arsehole	has	bewitched	you	with	his	oh	so	soft	words,	his	unctuous	smoothness
and	“pwetty	pwetty”	promises.	Is	that	what	it’s	all	been	for?	Our	treks	over	frozen	mountains,	our	days	of
hunger	when	a	lump	of	mouldy	meat	seemed	like	Paradise,	our	shared	battles	.	.	.	our	mingled	blood	.	.	.
our	victories?’
‘Isn’t	it	time	to	enjoy	some	reward?	The	past	years	have	been	like	living	under	a	whirlwind.	Whenever
I	tried	to	put	down	my	roots,	they	were	ripped	out.	But	I	am	still	here	–	unlike	my	cousin	Mahmud	Khan,
whose	 flayed	 skin	 was	 stretched	 to	 make	 a	 drum,	 or	 my	 male	 kin	 in	 Herat,	 all	 slaughtered,	 or	 my
murdered	half-brother	in	Ferghana	.	.	.	I	feel	my	time	is	coming	at	last	.	.	.’
‘Then	don’t	be	a	fool	by	throwing	everything	away.	Don’t	let	understandable	gratitude	for	your	sister’s
return	cloud	your	judgement.	You	have	an	army	–	a	good	one.	Let	the	Persians	stay	in	Persia.	We’re	strong
enough	to	take	Samarkand	on	our	own.	Ride	through	the	Turquoise	Gate	again	as	your	own	man,	not	as
another’s	hireling.’
‘You	don’t	understand	.	.	.’	Babur’s	anger	was	rising.	Baburi	was	always	so	obstinate.
‘I	do	understand.	Your	mindless	obsession	with	becoming	another	Timur	is	blinding	you	–	pushing	you
into	contemplating	stupid	short-cuts.’
‘What	would	you	know	about	that?’
‘Because	I	come	from	the	streets?	Is	that	what	you	mean?’	Baburi	was	on	his	feet	now,	his	stool	lying
on	its	side	where	he’d	kicked	it.	‘That’s	precisely	why	I	can	see	more	clearly	than	you	–	you	idiot.	If	you
take	the	shah’s	offer,	it	is	as	if	I’d	gone	down	an	alley	with	some	scumbag	to	suck	his	cock	in	return	for	a
meal	.	.	.	you’ll	be	like	a	brood	mare	to	that	stud	stallion	the	shah	sent	you	–	to	be	mounted,	dominated,
and	compelled	to	satisfy	your	master’s	every	desire	.	.	.	I	was	never	that	desperate.	Neither	should	you	be
.	.	.	Once	you	succumb	he’ll	be	back	for	more	.	.	.’
‘You’re	 being	 ridiculous.	 Leave	 me.’	 Babur	 got	 up	 and	 turned	 away.	 Why	 couldn’t	 Baburi	 acquiesce
gracefully	in	his	schemes	as	others	did?
Baburi	didn’t	obey.	Instead	he	gripped	Babur’s	shoulder,	yanking	him	round	to	face	him,	eyes	blazing.
‘What	would	that	father	of	yours	that	you’re	always	going	on	about	have	said?	Or	your	old	battle-axe	of	a
grandmother?	They’d	have	been	ashamed	you	could	be	bought	so	easily,	become	any	man’s	vassal	–	ready
to	take	it	up	the	arse	whenever	your	master	feels	like	it	.	.	.’

Overwhelmed	 by	 anger	 that	 Baburi	 dared	 speak	 to	 him	 like	 this,	 Babur	 pulled	 himself	 free,	 stepped
back	 and	 swung	 his	 fist	 at	 Baburi’s	 sneering	 face	 with	 all	 his	 strength.	 He	 heard	 a	 dull	 crunch	 as	 his
friend’s	nose	broke	and	blood	spurted.
For	 a	 second,	 Baburi’s	 hand	 was	 on	 his	 dagger	 and	 Babur	 instinctively	 reached	 for	 his.	 But	 instead
Baburi	raised	his	right	hand	to	cover	his	nose	and	–	eyes	never	leaving	Babur’s	–	felt	with	his	left	hand
around	the	waist	of	his	now	blood-soaked	tunic	for	the	end	of	his	sash.	Grabbing	it,	he	tried	to	staunch	the
flow.
‘Baburi	.	.	.’
Pulling	the	sash	from	his	face	for	a	second,	Baburi	spat	at	Babur’s	feet.	Then	ducking	through	the	tent
flap	he	was	gone,	leaving	a	trail	of	ruby-bright	droplets	of	blood	on	the	sheepskins	on	the	floor.
Babur	 resisted	 the	 impulse	 to	 go	 after	 him.	 He	 was	 a	 king,	 and	 Baburi	 should	 remember	 that.	 He
shouldn’t	have	hit	him	but	Baburi	had	had	it	coming	.	.	.	He	was	hot-headed,	arrogant.	When	he	thought
about	it	coolly,	rationally	–	as	he	would	–	he’d	realise	that	the	decision	Babur	was	about	to	make	was	the
right	one	.	.	.	Babur	would	ride	through	the	Turquoise	Gate	and	he’d	do	it	without	shame,	head	high.
‘Guard!’	Babur	shouted.	A	man’s	head	poked	through	the	entrance	flap.	‘Summon	my	war	council.’

Babur	watched	the	Persian	envoy	and	his	escort	ride	away.	In	the	envoy’s	saddlebags	was	a	letter	from
Babur	pledging	his	allegiance	to	the	shah.	Tonight	there	would	be	more	feasting	in	the	camp.	Babur	would
summon	his	commanders	to	announce	that	as	soon	as	Persian	reinforcements	joined	them	they	would	ride
north-east	for	Samarkand	to	purge	it	of	its	infestation	of	Uzbeks	and	claim	it	as	their	own.	His	men,	fired
by	the	prospect	of	rich	booty,	would	roar	their	approval.	There’d	be	no	need	to	dwell	on	the	bargain	he’d
made	 with	 the	 shah.	 There	 would	 be	 time	 enough,	 when	 he	 was	 master	 of	 Samarkand’s	 blue-domed
mosques	and	palaces,	to	consider	how	to	present	it	to	his	people.	And	why	should	they	care?	They	would
again	 be	 ruled	 by	 a	 Timurid	 prince,	 not	 a	 barbarous	 ancestral	 foe.	 The	 Persians	 would	 depart	 to	 their
distant	homeland.	Soon	he	would	be	able	to	think	of	further	conquests.
Baburi	 would	 be	 nursing	 his	 wounded	 pride	 and	 his	 wounded	 nose	 somewhere.	 Now	 that	 his	 own
temper	had	cooled,	the	deal	had	been	done	and	the	envoy	was	gone,	Babur	was	anxious	to	see	his	friend
and	heal	their	rift.	There	was	so	much	he	had	not	said,	so	much	he	had	said	badly	.	.	.
Still	wearing	the	bright	green	tunic	–	chosen	in	tribute	to	Samarkand	–	in	which	he	had	received	the
Persian	envoy	for	his	farewell	audience,	Babur	walked	through	the	camp	to	Baburi’s	tent,	pitched	close	to
Baisanghar’s.
The	flaps	were	thrown	back	and	he	went	inside.	The	rugs	on	the	floor	were	spotted	with	blood	and	the
few	possessions,	mostly	clothes,	strewn	hither	and	thither	as	though	someone	had	hastily	searched	through
them,	deciding	what	to	take	and	what	to	leave.	In	one	corner	was	what	looked	like	splintered	wood.	As
Babur	 went	 closer	 he	 recognised	 the	 bow	 and	 gilded	 quiver	 set	 with	 golden	 tiger’s	 eyes	 he’d	 given
Baburi	the	day	he’d	made	him	Qor	Begi,	Lord	of	the	Bow.	The	bow	was	snapped	in	two,	and	the	quiver
smashed,	as	if	someone	had	stamped	on	it	–	the	gems	had	fallen	from	their	mountings.	Babur	picked	one
up.	The	round	little	stone	felt	cold.
He	 hurried	 outside,	 almost	 tripping	 over	 the	 black	 leather	 gauntlet	 Baburi	 wore	 to	 go	 hawking	 but
which	now	lay	on	the	floor.	Baisanghar	was	giving	orders	to	two	guards.
‘Where’s	Baburi?’
‘I	haven’t	seen	him	since	this	morning,	Majesty.’

‘Check	whether	his	horse	is	here.’
Baisanghar	 despatched	 a	 guard	 to	 the	 corral	 where	 the	 handsome	 chestnut	 Baburi	 had	 taken	 from	 an
Uzbek	chieftain	should	have	been	grazing,	but	Babur	already	knew	the	answer.	‘He’s	gone	.	.	.’
‘Majesty?’
‘Baburi	–	he’s	gone.	Send	riders	to	look	for	him	and	bring	him	back.	Do	it	now,	at	once!’	He	realised
he	was	shouting.
Startled,	 Baisanghar	 hurried	 off,	 and	 Babur	 went	 back	 inside	 Baburi’s	 tent.	 He	 picked	 up	 the	 broken
bow.	 Baisanghar’s	 men	 could	 ride	 their	 horses	 into	 the	 ground	 but	 it	 wouldn’t	 be	 any	 use.	 If	 Baburi
wanted	to	disappear	he	would.

	
	
	

Chapter	19
The	Kizil-Bashi
	

This	glorious,	mellow,	sunlit	day	in	the	autumn	of	1511	deserved	a	special	mention	in	his	diary,	Babur
thought,	as	he	rode	at	the	head	of	his	army	towards	the	Turquoise	Gate	where	banners	of	bright	green	–	not
Uzbek	 black	 –	 again	 bellied	 in	 the	 breeze.	 Last	 time	 he’d	 entered	 Samarkand	 as	 its	 king	 more	 than	 a
decade	 ago	 he’d	 been	 just	 a	 youth.	 Now	 he	 was	 twenty-nine,	 toughened	 and	 tempered	 by	 all	 that	 had
happened	to	him	since.
The	city	had	fallen	without	a	struggle.	Babur	and	his	army	of	twenty	thousand,	swelled	by	the	Persian
cavalry,	 had	 been	 too	 much	 for	 the	 occupying	 Uzbeks.	 They	 had	 fled,	 preferring	 to	 take	 refuge	 in	 their
stronghold	of	Karshi	in	the	northern	mountains	than	fight	a	far	superior	force.	On	learning	of	their	flight
Babur	had	taken	Shaibani	Khan’s	skull,	filled	it	with	blood	red	wine	and	drunk	deeply,	before	passing	it
round	to	his	commanders.
My	time	has	come,	he	thought	exultantly,	as	he	passed	beneath	the	glinting	gateway	to	the	deep,	echoing
boom	of	kettle-drums.	Tonight,	he	and	Maham	–	travelling	with	the	other	women	of	the	royal	household	in
mule	carts	with	trappings	of	gold	and	green	–	would	make	love.	According	to	his	astronomers,	the	planets
were	in	perfect	conjunction	for	the	conception	of	a	son.	He	would	have	a	further	heir	and	Maham	would
cease	to	weep	because	she	had	borne	him	no	more	children	since	Humayun.
As	he	emerged	from	the	purple	shadows	beneath	the	gate	into	the	city,	the	excited,	approving	cheers	of
his	people	–	a	human	rainbow	in	their	brightest	robes	–	burst	over	him,	joyously	shouting	his	name	and
Timur’s,	as	if	his	great	ancestor	were	there	by	his	side.	As	he	rode	up	the	broad	avenue	leading	to	the
citadel	and	the	Kok	Saray	he	saw	that	the	shopkeepers	had	draped	their	stalls	with	brilliant	brocades	and
the	 ruby-red	 velvet	 for	 which	 Samarkand	 was	 celebrated.	 From	 rooftops	 and	 windows,	 women	 threw
handfuls	of	dried	rose	petals	that	fluttered	in	the	air	like	pink	snowflakes.
But	 abruptly	 the	 happy	 shouting	 faltered.	 A	 hoarse,	 angry	 voice	 rose	 above	 the	 crowd:	 ‘Kizil-Bashi!
Kizil-Bashi!’	 Redheads!	 Redheads!	 Glancing	 back	 Babur	 realised	 that	 the	 people	 were	 looking	 at	 the
Persian	 cavalry	 as	 they	 came	 through	 the	 Turquoise	 Gate.	 The	 cry	 was	 now	 taken	 up	 by	 hundreds	 of
voices.	People	were	pointing	and	jeering	at	the	Persians	with	their	conical	red	caps	and	the	long	strip	of
scarlet	 cloth	 hanging	 down	 behind	 that	 showed	 they	 were	 not	 Sunni	 Muslims,	 like	 the	 people	 of
Samarkand	and	Babur,	but	Shiites,	like	their	master,	the	shah.
No	 matter,	 Babur	 told	 himself,	 staring	 resolutely	 ahead.	 He’d	 soon	 be	 rid	 of	 the	 Persians	 and	 his
subjects	would	realise	they	had	had	nothing	to	fear	from	them	or	their	differing	version	of	Muslim	faith.
Yet	he	couldn’t	banish	the	jeers	and	catcalls	from	his	mind.
This	new	sombre	mood	was	still	on	him	when,	three	hours	later,	he	stood	alone	in	his	public	audience
chamber	 in	 the	 Kok	 Saray,	 contemplating	 the	 gleaming	 cobalt	 blue,	 turquoise,	 yellow	 and	 white
geometrically	patterned	tiles	on	its	walls	and	domed	ceiling	that	had	so	astonished	him	the	first	time	he’d
seen	them.	He’d	anticipated	this	moment	for	so	long,	yet	the	glory	of	his	return	felt	diminished,	tarnished.
The	 magnificence	 around	 him	 seemed	 to	 fade,	 to	 be	 replaced	 by	 Baburi’s	 face.	 Baburi	 should	 have
been	 here,	 observing	 him	 with	 that	 quiet	 irony	 in	 his	 indigo	 eyes.	 But	 what	 would	 he	 have	 said	 at	 this

moment?	That	he’d	been	right	all	along,	that	Babur	was	not	his	own	master,	just	another	ruler’s	toy?	As	he
looked	into	the	future	he	had	assumed	would	be	so	glorious,	Babur	felt	truly	alone	.	.	.

‘Majesty,	they	are	waiting	for	you.’	The	lines	on	Baisanghar’s	grave	face	were	deep.	He	was	no	longer
the	 vigorous	 warrior	 who	 had	 ridden	 all	 those	 years	 ago	 to	 Ferghana	 to	 bring	 him	 Timur’s	 ring.	 It	 had
been	 right	 to	 make	 him	 grand	 vizier,	 Babur	 reflected.	 His	 long,	 loyal	 years	 of	 fighting	 and	 service
deserved	such	a	reward,	and	Maham	was	pleased	to	see	her	father	so	honoured.
Did	Baisanghar	ever	feel	the	frustration	that	sometimes	overcame	himself	?	Did	he	ever	long	again	to
sweep	down	on	a	raid	from	the	mountains	on	a	moonlit	night	with	a	cold	wind	scouring	his	face?	Or	to
sleep	on	hard	ground	under	the	stars,	sword	by	his	side,	unsure	what	the	next	day	would	bring	except	that
it	 would	 be	 hard	 and	 dangerous?	 Babur’s	 hankering	 for	 action	 was	 absurd,	 he	 knew,	 but	 after	 only	 six
weeks	in	Samarkand	he	was	restless.	He	wanted	to	get	back	to	Kabul	to	assure	himself	that	all	was	well
there,	even	though	he	had	left	it	strongly	garrisoned.	He	was	also	eager	to	recover	Ferghana,	which,	since
the	Uzbek	collapse,	had	been	dismembered	by	petty	local	warlords	with	more	fleas	than	real	troops.	He
could	swat	them	with	one	blow	of	his	fist	if	only	he	were	free	to	leave	Samarkand,	but	he	had	to	establish
order	in	the	city.	He	had	summoned	the	leading	citizens	to	announce	how	Samarkand	was	to	be	governed
and	now	they	were	waiting	–	no	doubt	hoping	for	lucrative	sinecures.
Babur	 entered	 his	 audience	 chamber	 and	 mounted	 his	 dais.	 At	 Baisanghar’s	 command,	 his	 waiting
subjects	prostrated	themselves	on	the	soft,	rich	carpets	the	Uzbeks	hadn’t	had	time	to	loot.	Mechanically
acknowledging	them,	Babur’s	mind	was	elsewhere.	The	Persian	troops	should	have	departed	by	now.	Yet,
though	some	had	left	as	soon	as	the	khutba	confirming	Babur	as	king	had	been	read,	a	thousand	were	still
camped	in	the	riverside	meadows	outside	the	Needlemaker’s	Gate.	With	them	was	the	shah’s	own	priest,
Mullah	Husayn.	Whenever	he	broached	the	question	of	the	Persians’	departure	with	their	commander	–	a
cousin	of	Shah	Ismail,	haughty	and	cold	–	the	answer	was	the	same:	he	was	awaiting	orders	from	the	shah.
As	soon	as	he	received	them	he	and	his	men	would	ride	away.
Babur	 couldn’t	 order	 them	 to	 go	 but	 he	 could	 insist	 that	 they	 kept	 off	 the	 streets	 of	 Samarkand.	 The
populace’s	hostility	hadn’t	died	away.	In	fact,	the	news	that	he	had	become	the	shah’s	vassal	had	only	fed
their	suspicion,	instead	of	reassuring	them	that	they	had	a	powerful	protector	as	Babur	had	hoped.	He	had
received	 several	 visits	 from	 the	 city’s	 mullahs,	 seeking	 assurances	 that	 the	 shah	 was	 not	 planning	 to
interfere	with	their	religion.	An	aged	priest	from	one	of	the	madrasas,	his	thin	face	nearly	as	pale	as	his
white	 robes,	 had	 gone	 further,	 upbraiding	 Babur	 for	 his	 dealings	 with	 the	 heretical	 Persians	 and
demanding	 he	 expel	 them.	 ‘Even	 the	 Uzbeks	 –	 wicked	 defilers	 of	 our	 city	 though	 they	 were	 –	 are	 true
believers	 .	 .	 .’	 he	 had	 said.	 ‘Even	 the	 Uzbeks	 .	 .	 .’	 Babur	 had	 never	 thought	 to	 hear	 words	 like	 that.
Somehow	he	must	send	the	Persians	on	their	way	.	.	.
‘Majesty,’	Baisanghar	interrupted	his	thoughts,	‘your	subjects	are	waiting	to	hear	you.’
Babur	unrolled	the	piece	of	paper	on	which	was	written	the	latest	list	of	public	appointments	–	a	stout
merchant	in	robes	of	peacock	blue	was	gazing	at	him	expectantly	–	but	as	he	did	so	the	velvet-covered,
gilded	throne	on	which	he	was	sitting	lurched	sideways.	Babur	tried	to	right	himself	but	he	and	the	throne
were	flung	to	the	floor.	A	rumbling,	roaring,	cracking	sound	filled	the	air	and	everything	shook.	A	lump	of
masonry,	bright	tiles	still	attached,	crashed	down	beside	him.
Bitter-tasting	dust	clogged	the	air	and	Babur	felt	he	was	choking,	but	as	he	gasped	for	breath,	his	mouth
filled	 with	 grit.	 He	 couldn’t	 even	 open	 his	 eyes.	 Bracing	 himself,	 he	 covered	 his	 head	 with	 his	 hands,

waiting	 for	 a	 piece	 of	 masonry	 to	 land	 on	 him.	 But	 after	 a	 few	 more	 moments	 the	 shaking	 stopped	 as
abruptly	 as	 it	 had	 begun.	 With	 groans	 rising	 from	 all	 around,	 Babur	 raised	 his	 head	 cautiously	 and
managed	to	open	his	streaming	eyes	a	little.	Though	some	stones	had	been	dislodged,	the	main	walls	and
ceilings	 of	 the	 Kok	 Saray	 had	 withstood	 the	 earthquake.	 Timur’s	 builders	 had	 done	 a	 good	 job.	 But
looking	around	he	saw	Baisanghar	lying	unconscious,	his	brilliant	green	robes	of	office	now	grey.
‘Guards,’	Babur	yelled,	not	sure	who	would	answer	him.	Almost	at	once	he	heard	running	feet.	Through
the	drifting,	stifling	dust	he	recognised	two	of	his	bodyguards	who	had	been	on	duty	in	the	antechamber.
‘Send	for	my	hakim	and	fetch	any	other	doctors	you	can	find.	The	grand	vizier	is	hurt	–	others	too.’	Babur
got	to	his	feet,	staggered	to	Baisanghar	and	put	his	fingers	to	the	side	of	his	neck	as	he’d	so	often	done	to
wounded	comrades	in	battle.	Yes,	he	was	alive	–	he	could	feel	the	faint	but	rhythmic	pulsing	of	his	blood.
On	his	forehead	a	huge	bruise	was	purpling.	Baisanghar’s	eyes	flickered	open	and	he	looked	up	at	Babur,
confused.
‘It	 was	 an	 earthquake	 .	 .	 .	 The	 hakim	 is	 coming.’	 Babur	 ripped	 off	 his	 outer	 robe,	 rolled	 it	 up	 and
placed	it	beneath	Baisanghar’s	head.	‘I	must	go	to	the	women’s	quarters.’
All	around	him	in	the	audience	chamber	dazed	men	were	picking	themselves	and	others	up,	but	a	few
were	lying	still.	Scrambling	over	chunks	of	masonry,	Babur	ran	from	the	chamber,	making	for	the	broad
flight	 of	 stairs	 leading	 to	 the	 top	 storey	 and	 the	 women’s	 apartments.	 Hurling	 himself	 up	 them,	 he	 saw
deep	fissures	in	the	dark	stonework	and	that	lamps	and	torches	had	tumbled	from	their	niches	–	he	kicked
them	aside	–	but	again	Timur’s	walls	had	held.
At	the	top,	he	saw	that	the	tall	double	doors	–	resilvered	and	inlaid	afresh	with	turquoises	since	the	day
when	a	youthful	Babur	and	his	men	had	battered	them	down	–	were	still	standing,	though	a	crack	gaped	in
the	stone	lintel	above	and	part	of	the	elaborately	tiled	ceiling	had	collapsed,	littering	the	floor	with	shards
as	 bright	 as	 butterfly	 wings.	 Of	 the	 attendants	 who	 should	 have	 been	 outside	 there	 was	 no	 sign.	 They
would	pay	for	their	negligence,	Babur	thought,	as	he	threw	his	weight	against	the	doors	and	pushed	them
open.
The	first	face	he	saw	was	Maham’s,	her	long	hair	hanging	around	her.	She	was	standing	in	the	centre	of
the	chamber,	which,	apart	from	a	few	tumbled	pieces	of	furniture,	spilled	food	and	broken	clay	dishes,
was	untouched.	A	sobbing	Humayun	was	in	her	arms	but	her	eyes	were	bright	and	clear.
‘See,	Humayun?	I	told	you	there	was	nothing	to	be	afraid	of	.	.	.	It	was	only	a	foolish	giant	stamping	his
feet	to	annoy	us	.	.	.	I	said	your	father	would	come.’	Babur	kissed	her	forehead	and	took	Humayun	from
her,	feeling	the	warmth	of	his	body	which,	now	he	was	three,	was	losing	some	of	its	puppy	fat.	The	boy’s
hazel	eyes	–	so	like	his	mother’s	–	looked	into	his	own.	He	stopped	crying	and	smiled.

‘How	bad	is	the	damage?’
‘Bad	enough.	Many	houses	and	granaries	have	been	destroyed,	Majesty.	They	were	not	as	sturdily	built
as	the	Kok	Saray	About	a	hundred	are	dead	and	nearly	three	hundred	injured.’	Beneath	his	great	turban	of
office,	Baisanghar’s	face	was	still	heavily	bruised	though	he	had	recovered	quickly.
‘The	royal	treasuries	will	pay	for	the	rebuilding	–	tell	the	citizens	so	–	and	distribute	grain	from	our
stores	to	anyone	in	want	.	.	.	With	winter	approaching,	my	people	must	not	starve.’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
After	Baisanghar	had	left	him,	Babur	sat	alone	in	the	octagonal	gilded	room	he	used	as	his	chamber	of
private	 audience.	 He	 had	 been	 lucky.	 Both	 of	 his	 wives	 –	 Maham	 and	 Gulrukh	 –	 and	 his	 two	 sons,

Humayun	and	Kamran,	were	unharmed.	Khanzada	was	safe	in	Kabul	with	Kutlugh	Nigar.	But	for	this	to
have	happened	so	early	in	his	reign	was	a	bad	omen.	The	people	were	already	blaming	the	catastrophe	on
the	 presence	 of	 the	 Persians.	 The	 insistent,	 repetitive	 cry	 of	 the	 muezzin	 calling	 all	 to	 midday	 prayer
interrupted	his	bleak	thoughts.	It	was	Friday	and	he	would	go	to	the	Great	Mosque	to	pray	in	public.	It
would	 please	 the	 people	 and	 he	 himself	 might	 find	 some	 spiritual	 balm,	 something	 to	 quell	 his
restlessness	and	unease.
Twenty	 minutes	 later,	 regally	 dressed	 in	 a	 green	 brocade	 tunic	 with	 a	 tasselled	 dark	 green	 woollen
sash,	a	fur-lined	cloak,	an	enamelled	gold	chain	around	his	neck,	yellow	deerskin	boots	on	his	feet	and
Alamgir	hanging	at	his	side,	Babur	rode	out	from	the	Kok	Saray	towards	the	soaring	recessed	arch,	the
iwan,	that	led	into	Timur’s	mosque.	His	guards	had	to	use	their	spears	to	clear	a	path	through	the	thronging
streets	 but,	 unlike	 the	 usual	 babble	 of	 people	 hurrying	 to	 Friday	 prayers,	 the	 crowds	 today	 seemed
sullenly	silent.
On	reaching	the	paved	courtyard	outside	the	mosque,	Babur	dismounted	amid	drifts	of	golden	leaves
that	 had	 fallen	 from	 the	 trees	 and,	 followed	 by	 his	 guards,	 entered.	 The	 mullah	 –	 the	 old	 man	 who	 had
come	 to	 beseech	 him	 about	 the	 Persians	 –	 was	 in	 his	 carved	 marble	 pulpit	 to	 one	 side	 of	 the	 mihrab,
preaching.	Babur	knelt	in	the	space	allotted	to	the	king	at	the	very	centre	of	the	mosque	and	bent	forward
to	touch	his	forehead	to	the	floor.	The	mullah	was	speaking	of	the	transitoriness	of	human	life	and	offering
consolation	to	those	who	had	suffered	in	the	earthquake.	Babur,	conscious	of	hundreds	of	eyes	upon	him,
listened	attentively.
Suddenly	 the	 mullah	 fell	 silent.	 Looking	 up	 in	 surprise,	 Babur	 saw	 that	 he	 was	 gazing	 towards	 the
entrance.	Turning	he	saw	what	the	mullah	had	seen	–	the	tall,	stout,	extravagantly	bearded	figure	of	the
shah’s	priest,	Mullah	Husayn.	He	was	wearing	the	pointed	red	cap	and	sweeping	red	robes	of	the	Shiite.
His	 escort	 of	 six	 Persian	 cavalrymen	 were	 also	 in	 the	 unmistakable	 insignia	 of	 the	 Kizil-Bashi.	 The
elderly	mullah	in	the	pulpit	watched	as	the	Persian	advanced	towards	him,	ignoring	the	hisses	rising	from
all	around.
Husayn	 looked	 directly	 at	 Babur.	 ‘As	 a	 guest	 in	 your	 city,	 may	 I	 have	 Your	 Majesty’s	 permission	 to
deliver	a	sermon	on	this	the	day	of	prayer	for	all	believers,	Shiite	and	Sunni.’
Concealing	his	anger	at	what	could	only	be	a	deliberate	act	of	provocation	and	was	certainly	a	breach
of	etiquette,	Babur	gave	a	curt	nod	and	gestured	to	the	old	mullah	to	step	down.
Husayn	took	his	place.	‘I	am	grateful	for	the	king’s	permission	to	speak.	May	God’s	manifold	blessings
be	upon	him.	Several	months	ago,	with	the	help	of	the	Lord	of	the	World,	the	mighty	Shah	Ismail	of	Persia,
you	were	delivered	from	a	great	evil.	Your	enemies,	the	Uzbeks,	were	forced	to	flee	and	you	have	your
king	 again.	 The	 shah	 is	 pleased	 that	 this	 is	 so.	 He	 is	 also	 pleased	 that	 His	 Majesty	 King	 Babur	 has
acknowledged	 him	 as	 his	 overlord	 .	 .	 .	 The	 shah	 welcomes	 your	 king	 as	 his	 brother.	 But,	 of	 course,
brothers	should	be	of	the	same	faith.	The	shah	has	asked	me	to	receive	your	king	as	a	faithful	Shiite	so	that
he	may,	in	turn,	bring	all	his	subjects	to	share	the	light	.	.	.’
There	was	a	collective	gasp	.	.	.
‘No!’	Babur	was	on	his	feet.	‘I	gave	the	shah	my	allegiance	but	my	religion	is	my	own.	I	will	never
convert	or	allow	the	forcible	conversion	of	my	people.	For	centuries	they	have	been	ruled	by	the	House
of	Timur.	They	cannot	be	coerced.	Neither	can	I.	Tell	that	to	your	master	.	.	.’
Husayn’s	dark	eyes	flashed	and	his	hands	clutched	the	edge	of	the	pulpit.	Clearly,	he	was	unaccustomed
to	being	gainsaid,	even	by	kings.	‘My	master	has	been	generous.	Do	not	forget	that	you	owe	him	more	than
a	kingdom.’
Babur	chose	his	next	words	with	care.	‘I	am	indebted	to	the	shah	for	many	things.	I	also	know	he	is	an
honourable	man	who	would	never	impose	impossible	conditions	on	a	loyal	friend.	Clearly	there	has	been

a	misunderstanding.	I	will	send	messengers	immediately	to	Persia	to	resolve	it.	I	suggest	that	you	return
there	 too.	 Your	 master	 will	 be	 missing	 your	 spiritual	 guidance	 and	 is	 doubtless	 anxious	 for	 your
presence.’
Husayn	was	shaking	his	big,	bearded	head	from	side	to	side.	Enough,	Babur	thought.	Signalling	to	his
guards	he	walked	from	the	mosque.	Until	that	moment	the	worshippers	had	been	passively	watching	and
listening,	 but	 now	 he	 could	 hear	 murmuring	 behind	 him	 –	 like	 an	 approaching	 swarm	 of	 hornets	 it	 was
growing	louder	and	louder.	As	he	walked	across	the	courtyard	and	mounted	his	horse,	people	spilled	out
of	 the	 mosque,	 some	 shouting	 angrily	 against	 the	 shah	 and	 his	 mullah,	 others,	 Babur	 realised,	 shouting
insults	against	himself.
The	worshippers	were	quickly	joined	by	others,	drawn	from	their	houses	by	the	disturbance	and	eager
to	know	what	was	going	on.	Despite	the	best	efforts	of	his	guards	–	and	despite	the	royal	green	banner	of
Samarkand	held	high	by	Babur’s	qorchi	to	command	respect	–	as	he	and	his	men	turned	down	the	avenue
that	led	back	to	the	Kok	Saray	they	were	soon	buffeted	by	the	press	of	people	making	for	the	mosque.
This	was	becoming	a	riot.	The	Persians	in	the	mosque	must	be	protected	or	the	shah	would	have	every
excuse	 to	 wage	 war	 against	 Samarkand.	 ‘Ride	 to	 the	 Kok	 Saray	 for	 reinforcements.	 Hurry!’	 Babur
ordered	two	of	his	men.	Then,	calling	to	the	rest	to	follow,	his	hand	on	his	sword	hilt,	he	turned	his	horse
back	through	the	heaving	mass	towards	the	mosque.	Halting	before	it,	he	addressed	the	angry	crowds.
‘You	have	my	word	on	the	Holy	Book	that	not	a	single	man,	woman	or	child	will	be	forced	to	convert!’
he	shouted.	But	no	one	was	listening.	Instead	an	angry	roar	went	up.	Over	his	shoulder,	Babur	saw	Mullah
Husayn	emerging	from	the	shadows	beneath	the	entrance	to	the	mosque,	the	Persian	soldiers	close	behind
him,	swords	drawn.	A	rotten	melon	flew	through	the	air	towards	Husayn,	who	made	no	attempt	to	dodge
it.	It	fell	at	his	feet,	spattering	his	robes	with	soft	orange	flesh	and	pips.	It	was	followed	by	what	looked
like	a	fistful	of	dung.	Then	a	piece	of	stone	whirled	past	the	mullah’s	left	ear	to	hit	the	tiled	wall	of	the
mosque,	chipping	off	a	shard	of	the	delicate	blue	glaze.
Emboldened,	people	began	picking	up	whatever	missiles	they	could	find	and	surged	forward,	yelling
obscenities.	Their	faces	were	ugly	with	hatred,	lips	drawn	back,	eyes	bulging.	Drawing	his	sword,	Babur
gestured	 to	 his	 men	 to	 form	 a	 barrier	 between	 the	 mob	 and	 the	 Persians.	 Then,	 urging	 his	 horse	 a	 few
paces	forward,	he	made	a	last	desperate	attempt	to	speak	to	his	people,	but	it	was	no	use.	Determined	to
get	at	the	Persians,	they	surged	past	him.	A	huge	man	in	an	orange	turban	grabbed	the	bridle	of	his	horse.
Whether	he	meant	to	push	him	out	of	the	way	or	to	attack	him	wasn’t	clear	but	Babur	reacted	instinctively
and,	 drawing	 his	 dagger,	 slashed	 at	 the	 man’s	 arm.	 Roaring	 with	 pain,	 he	 let	 go	 and	 stumbled	 forward.
Babur’s	frightened	horse	reared	and	one	of	its	hoofs	kicked	the	man	hard	in	the	face.	He	fell	like	a	stone.
Others	were	now	yanking	at	his	bridle,	trying	to	bring	down	his	horse.	Did	they	even	know	who	they
were	 attacking?	 Babur	 slashed	 around	 him,	 trying	 to	 force	 a	 way	 through	 to	 rejoin	 his	 guards,	 but	 his
assailants	 were	 determined.	 One	 was	 clutching	 what	 looked	 like	 a	 butcher’s	 knife.	 Instead	 of	 trying	 to
stab	Babur,	he	plunged	it	into	the	throat	of	his	horse.	The	beast	gave	a	great	shuddering	sigh	and	slipped	to
the	ground,	front	legs	crumpling.
Tugging	 his	 feet	 from	 the	 stirrups	 Babur	 leaped	 sideways.	 He	 heard	 voices	 shouting,	 ‘Traitor!’	 and
‘Heretic!’	then	felt	hands	grabbing	at	him	as	he	managed	to	wriggle	away	through	the	mass	of	legs	until	at
last	it	seemed	to	be	thinning.	With	the	mob	between	him	and	his	men,	all	he	could	do	was	get	himself	back
to	the	Kok	Saray.	Taking	a	deep	breath,	Babur	jumped	to	his	feet	and	ran	for	it,	head	down,	weapons	in
both	hands.
Turning	a	corner,	he	found	himself	in	a	small	square,	empty	and	strangely	silent	after	the	mayhem	he	had
just	 escaped	 and	 could	 still	 hear	 behind	 him.	 On	 two	 sides	 the	 houses	 had	 been	 badly	 damaged	 in	 the
earthquake:	 their	 metal-bound	 doors	 hung	 crazily	 from	 twisted	 hinges	 and	 there	 were	 jagged	 cracks	 in

their	brickwork,	a	few	big	enough	for	a	man	to	squeeze	through.	Their	owners	must	have	abandoned	them,
and	others,	whose	houses	still	stood,	had	gone	too.
In	 one	 corner,	 beneath	 the	 eaves	 of	 an	 old	 house	 that	 had	 been	 almost	 completely	 destroyed	 –	 each
storey	had	collapsed	neatly	upon	the	one	below	–	there	was	a	well.	Babur	ran	to	it,	dipped	in	the	leather
bucket	and	drank	the	brackish	water.	Wiping	his	mouth,	he	looked	around,	assessing	what	to	do	with	the
same	deadly	sense	of	purpose	as	on	a	raid	or	on	the	battlefield.	Strange	to	think	how	he’d	been	hungering
for	action	but	he’d	never	expected	his	wish	to	be	granted	so	soon	or	in	this	way.
He	must	get	away.	At	any	moment	the	shouting,	baying	mob	–	just	a	street	or	two	away	–	would	find
him.	A	narrow	alleyway	led	off	the	square	to	his	right.	He	started	towards	it,	only	to	discover	that	it	was
blocked	with	rubble	from	the	earthquake.
‘There	 he	 is	 –	 the	 bastard	 who	 would	 make	 heretics	 of	 us.’	 Stepping	 back	 against	 the	 wall	 of	 the
alleyway,	and	glancing	back	into	the	square,	Babur	saw	some	nine	or	ten	men,	clothes	torn,	faces	bloodsmeared,	 with	 crude	 wooden	 implements	 in	 their	 hands.	 They’d	 obviously	 been	 running	 hard	 and	 their
expressions	were	both	crazed	and	exultant.	Babur	had	seen	that	look	many	times	before,	on	the	faces	of
warriors	who	had	just	killed.	These	artisans	or	shopkeepers	–	whatever	they	were	–	had	tasted	blood	and
liked	it.
But	they	weren’t	looking	towards	him	–	in	fact,	they	hadn’t	noticed	him.	They	were	staring	at	something
high	up	and	out	of	Babur’s	sight.	Cautiously,	he	edged	back	towards	the	square.	Then	 he	 saw	 what	 had
caught	their	attention.	The	‘bastard’	they	were	after	was	Mullah	Husayn,	who	was	peering	down	from	the
upper	storey	of	a	tall	house	on	one	side	of	the	square	that	was	still	intact.	He’d	lost	his	red	cap	and	his
face	above	the	thick	dark	beard	was	pale,	but	as	he	surveyed	his	pursuers	his	eyes	burned.
‘All	 Sunnis	 are	 heretics,’	 he	 bawled.	 ‘Not	 one	 of	 you	 will	 reach	 Paradise.	 Your	 souls	 will	 be
consigned	to	the	dungheap.	Kill	me	if	you	dare.	Make	a	martyr	of	me,	and	tonight	I	will	dine	in	Paradise
with	my	Shiite	brothers	.	.	.’
The	men	needed	no	encouragement	and	ran	towards	the	wooden	doors	of	the	house,	which	someone	–
probably	Husayn	himself	–	had	barred.	They	began	to	look	for	something	to	batter	down	the	door.	Much
as	Babur	hated	the	mullah,	he	could	not	allow	him	to	be	murdered.	Glancing	up,	he	saw	that	the	houses	on
the	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 square	 left	 standing	 were	 interconnected	 by	 wooden	 rooftop	 walkways,	 a	 device
introduced	in	Timur’s	day	to	allow	the	ladies	of	the	city	to	take	the	air	and	visit	one	another	unseen.
Keeping	close	to	what	remained	of	the	walls	and	trying	not	to	stumble	over	the	debris,	Babur	made	for
a	plane	tree	growing	about	thirty	yards	to	the	right	of	the	house	where	Husayn	was	still	raving,	thereby
providing	a	useful	distraction	from	his	own	activities.	The	tree’s	spreading	branches	would	give	him	the
leg-up	 he	 needed,	 and	 though	 it	 had	 shed	 most	 of	 its	 papery	 red-gold	 leaves,	 enough	 remained	 to
camouflage	him	as	he	climbed.	Grunting,	Babur	leaped	into	the	tree	and	was	soon	on	the	flat	roof	of	the
house	next	to	the	one	where	the	mullah	was	still	holding	forth.
Keeping	low	and	praying	it	would	take	his	weight,	he	crossed	the	swaying	wooden	slats	of	the	little
bridge	 connecting	 the	 two	 houses.	 Then,	 treading	 softly	 so	 that	 he	 did	 not	 alert	 Husayn,	 he	 raised	 the
wooden	trapdoor	he	found	and	climbed	cautiously	down	the	narrow	flight	of	stairs	into	a	small,	whitepainted	 attic.	 In	 one	 corner	 another	 broader	 staircase	 led	 down	 to	 where	 Husayn	 must	 be.	 Drawing	 his
dagger,	 Babur	 crept	 catlike	 towards	 it	 and	 slowly	 descended.	 After	 a	 few	 steps	 he	 peered	 down.	 The
mullah	was	standing	at	the	window,	declaiming	angrily.	Babur	stepped	forward	and	pressed	the	tip	of	his
blade	into	the	small	of	the	man’s	back.
‘Don’t	 do	 anything	 to	 show	 them	 I’m	 here,’	 he	 hissed.	 ‘Just	 step	 back	 from	 the	 window.	 Come	 on	 –
now!’	He	would	have	liked	to	drive	his	dagger	into	the	arrogant	fool	or	throw	him	to	the	crowd	below	–
he	deserved	it.	But	for	the	sake	of	Samarkand	that	mustn’t	happen.

Somewhat	to	Babur’s	surprise,	Husayn	obeyed.
‘Turn	round.’
As	the	mullah	did	so	and	saw	who	it	was,	relief	flickered	briefly	in	his	eyes.	Perhaps	he	was	not	as
intent	on	martyrdom	and	his	dinner	in	Paradise	as	he	had	said.	Almost	at	once,	a	mighty	thump,	followed
by	a	raucous	cheer	and	shouts	of	encouragement,	showed	that	the	crowd	were	close	to	breaking	down	the
door.
‘Up	the	stairs	to	the	roof	–	quickly.’
The	mullah	gathered	his	robes	and	half	ran,	half	stumbled	up	them.
Tucking	his	dagger	back	into	his	sash,	now	he	was	sure	that	Husayn	would	give	him	no	trouble,	Babur
followed.	Up	on	the	roof,	he	closed	the	trapdoor,	then	tried	to	decide	which	way	to	go.	They’d	be	caught
if	they	climbed	down	the	tree	and	he	wasn’t	sure	the	mullah	would	make	it	anyway.
Babur	ran	across	the	roof	to	the	opposite	side	and	peered	down.	Below,	a	wide	street	was	lined	with
what	looked	like	workshops	–	the	street	of	the	armourers.	As	it	was	Friday,	they	were	shuttered	and	no
one	 was	 about.	 The	 distance	 to	 the	 paved	 ground	 was	 about	 twenty-five	 feet	 and	 the	 mud-brick	 walls
offered	little	purchase.	But	another	crash	from	below	told	him	he	had	little	time	to	ponder.	The	entrance
door	wouldn’t	hold	for	much	longer.	He	made	his	decision.	‘Take	off	your	sash	–	quickly.’
Blinking,	the	mullah	obeyed,	unravelling	from	his	waist	a	length	of	thick,	heavily	embroidered	red	silk
at	least	nine	feet	long.	Pulling	out	his	dagger	and	sticking	it	into	his	boot,	Babur	unwound	his	own	sash,	a
more	modest	seven	feet	of	thick,	strong	wool.	They’d	still	have	to	jump	but	it	was	the	best	he	could	think
of	.	.	.	He	tied	the	two	sashes	together,	secured	the	woollen	end	–	the	strongest	he	guessed	–	to	a	metal
pulley	projecting	from	the	roof	that	was	used	to	haul	grain	and	other	supplies	up	there	for	storage.	Then	he
threw	the	other	end	over	the	side.
‘Go	first.	You’re	heavier	–	I’ll	take	some	of	the	strain.’
The	mullah	didn’t	hesitate.	Babur	turned	his	back	to	the	drop	and,	taking	the	improvised	rope	in	his	left
hand,	passed	it	behind	his	back	so	that	he	could	grip	it	with	his	right	hand,	then	braced	himself	against	it.
At	 a	 nod	 from	 Babur,	 Husayn	 lowered	 himself	 cautiously	 over	 the	 edge.	 At	 once,	 the	 material	 seemed
stretched	to	near	breaking	point	and	the	knot	between	the	sashes	began	to	slip.
‘Hurry!’	Babur	yelled,	and	felt	the	rope	go	slack.	He	peered	down	into	the	street	and	saw	the	mullah
lying	in	a	tangle	of	red	robes,	rubbing	his	shoulder.	The	sound	of	angry,	excited	voices	and	of	the	trapdoor
to	the	roof	being	pushed	open	told	him	he	had	no	more	time.	He	tightened	the	knot	again,	gripped	the	rope
and,	trusting	to	fate,	leaped	.	.	.	He	braced	his	feet	against	the	walls,	bouncing	off	them	as	he	descended,
but	suddenly	his	hands	slipped.
His	 landing	 was	 softened,	 though	 not	 much,	 by	 a	 stack	 of	 wood.	 The	 mullah	 was	 still	 lying	 groaning
where	he	had	fallen,	and	flushed	faces	were	looking	down	on	them	from	the	roof.	The	men	were	shouting
obscenities.	Any	moment	now	and	they’d	be	coming	down	the	makeshift	rope	themselves.	As	he	struggled
breathlessly	to	heave	the	mullah	to	his	feet,	Babur	heard	the	clattering	of	hoofs.	Some	of	his	bodyguard
were	 galloping	 in	 single	 file	 down	 the	 street	 towards	 him,	 two	 of	 them	 already	 fitting	 arrows	 to	 their
bowstrings,	ready	to	fire	at	Babur’s	assailants	on	the	roof	who	quickly	melted	from	view.
‘Majesty,	we’ve	been	searching	for	you	ever	since	we	became	separated.	Quickly!	There	are	mobs	all
over	the	city	.	.	.’
One	of	his	men	dismounted	to	offer	him	his	horse.	Wearily	Babur	staggered	to	his	feet	and	jumped	up.
With	 two	 of	 his	 men	 riding	 double	 and	 the	 mullah,	 still	 moaning,	 behind	 another	 guard,	 the	 little	 group
made	swiftly	for	the	safety	of	the	Kok	Saray.

‘I	have	withdrawn	my	armies	westwards	to	protect	my	own	borders	and	cannot	offer	you	the	assistance
you	 seek.	 Indeed,	 why	 should	 I?	 You	 have	 spat	 in	 the	 face	 of	 my	 generosity	 and	 insulted	 my	 religion.
Mullah	Husayn	has	told	me	what	passed	in	Samarkand	–	how	he	was	reviled,	insulted	and	hunted	through
its	streets	like	a	dog.	In	spurning	him	and	the	true	way,	you	and	your	people	have	spurned	me.	May	God
the	merciful	forgive	your	crimes	against	him.’
Babur	 stared	 down	 at	 Shah	 Ismail’s	 letter.	 It	 looked	 as	 if	 the	 mullah	 hadn’t	 told	 him	 that	 Babur	 –	 in
person	 –	 had	 saved	 his	 miserable	 neck.	 Slowly,	 deliberately,	 he	 ripped	 the	 dark	 red	 wax	 seal	 stamped
with	the	lion	–	the	personal	emblem	of	the	shah	–	from	the	bottom	of	the	letter,	which	he	tore	into	small
pieces.	Then	he	thrust	the	lot	into	the	heart	of	the	bright	green	flames	of	the	wormwood	fire,	kept	burning
day	 and	 night	 in	 his	 chamber	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 defeat	 the	 chill	 that,	 at	 the	 height	 of	 winter,	 with	 snow
drifting	against	the	city	walls,	seemed	to	seep	from	the	very	stones	of	the	Kok	Saray.
‘It	is	only	as	we	expected,	Majesty	.	.	.’	Baisanghar	said	quietly.
‘I	know	–	but	I	still	can’t	believe	the	shah	will	let	the	Uzbeks	take	the	city	.	.	.	I	didn’t	think	his	malice
would	extend	that	far	.	.	.’	Babur	watched	the	wax	melt	and	the	paper	flare	and	burn,	taking	with	them	his
hopes.
‘He	is	used	to	being	obeyed.	Once	he	had	you	in	his	power	he	expected	you	would	yield	to	everything
he	wanted.’
‘That	is	just	as	Baburi	warned	.	.	.	I’ve	been	naïve.	But	I	did	not	believe	the	shah	was	dishonest	.	.	.	he
never	said	that	I	or	my	people	must	convert	and	he	must	know	he	could	not	have	coerced	them	without
spilling	blood.	As	it	was,	it	took	us	a	month	to	quieten	the	city	after	Mullah	Husayn’s	sermon.’
‘At	least	the	Persians	have	gone,	Majesty	.	.	.’
‘Yes,	but	at	the	wrong	time.	I	should	have	rid	myself	of	them	as	soon	as	I	became	king.	Then	the	people
would	have	been	less	suspicious	of	me.	Instead,	I	let	them	stay	long	enough	to	undermine	me	and	then,	just
when	I	needed	them	to	protect	Samarkand,	they	left.	The	Uzbeks	have	already	retaken	Bokhara.	As	soon
as	the	winter	ends	they	will	fall	on	us.	Even	though	the	system	of	messengers	I	have	introduced	tells	me
that	 Kabul	 and	 its	 territories	 are	 quiet,	 I	 cannot	 summon	 reinforcements	 from	 there	 or	 I	 will	 leave	 it
vulnerable	to	attack	or	rebellion,	just	as	when	I	first	took	Samarkand	and	unthinkingly	hazarded	Ferghana.
I	will,	of	course,	fortify	and	provision	the	city	but	do	I	have	the	support	of	the	people?	I	can	never	hold
the	city	if	I	face	enemies	within	the	walls	as	well	as	outside.’
‘I	don’t	know,	Majesty.’
‘No,	Baisangar,	neither	do	I	.	.	.’

What	was	the	point	of	looking	back?	Already	Samarkand’s	wondrous,	fantastical	outline	was	fading	into
the	 pinks,	 mauves	 and	 oranges	 of	 a	 spectacular	 sunset.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 Nature	 herself	 was	 celebrating	 his
departure.	 Perhaps	 tomorrow	 an	 equally	 glorious	 dawn	 would	 unfurl	 to	 welcome	 the	 Uzbeks	 as	 they
swept	in	from	their	encampment	five	miles	north	of	the	city.
Who	would	have	thought	that,	with	Shaibani	Khan	dead,	they’d	have	found	new	leaders	and	organised
themselves	 so	 well?	 The	 Uzbeks	 were	 like	 a	 column	 of	 ants:	 when	 some	 were	 crushed,	 others	 surged
forward	and	their	relentless	advance	never	faltered	.	.	.
Not	only	had	the	shah	refused	to	help	him	–	damning	Babur	as	a	heretic	king	–	but	he	had	enraged	the

citizens	of	Samarkand	yet	further.	Almost	a	month	ago,	during	the	first	days	of	spring,	Persian	troops	had
overrun	 an	 isolated	 Uzbek	 encampment	 west	 of	 Bokhara	 where	 many	 women	 and	 children,	 as	 well	 as
warriors,	had	been	living	out	the	winter.	Rounding	up	their	prisoners,	the	Persians	had	quickly	made	clear
that	they	were	not	simply	punishing	the	Uzbeks	for	their	past	attacks	on	the	shah	and	his	territories,	but	for
the	 divisions	 between	 Shiite	 and	 Sunni.	 In	 the	 mosques	 of	 Persia,	 at	 Shah	 Ismail’s	 urging,	 the	 mullahs
were	 now	 declaring	 all	 Sunnis	 enemies	 of	 God.	 And	 the	 Uzbeks	 –	 like	 Babur	 and	 the	 people	 of
Samarkand	 –	 were	 Sunni.	 The	 Persians	 had	 offered	 the	 Uzbek	 men,	 women	 and	 children	 the	 chance	 to
become	Shiite	then	killed	brutally	and	in	cold	blood	those	who	did	not	immediately	accept.
The	inhabitants	of	Samarkand	had	made	their	feelings	clear	to	Babur:	if	the	Uzbeks	wanted	to	return,	let
them.	 Better	 the	 enemies	 of	 their	 blood	 than	 the	 enemies	 of	 their	 faith.	 The	 brutal	 truth	 was	 that	 they
trusted	 the	 Uzbeks	 to	 protect	 them	 from	 the	 shah	 and	 Shiitism	 –	 they	 didn’t	 trust	 Babur.	 He	 was	 fatally
compromised	 by	 his	 previous	 dalliance	 with	 the	 shah.	 In	 vain	 Babur	 had	 reminded	 them	 of	 the	 horrors
perpetrated	 by	 Shaibani	 Khan	 but	 it	 seemed	 they	 had	 short	 memories.	 Faced	 with	 near	 rebellion	 and
demands	from	the	Uzbeks,	galloping	down	in	their	tens	of	thousands	from	Karshi	and	other	strongholds	in
the	north,	to	relinquish	the	city,	Babur	had	issued	an	ultimatum	to	his	citizens:	‘Help	me	defend	the	city	–
our	civilisation	and	culture	–	or	I	shall	return	to	Kabul.’	They	had	refused	his	call.
At	least	his	hold	on	Kabul	remained	firm	and	his	family	were	safe	there.	He	had	sent	Maham,	Gulrukh
and	his	sons	ahead	with	a	strong	escort.	Now	he	must	follow.	As	so	often	in	recent	weeks,	he	thought	of
Baburi.	 His	 friend	 had	 been	 right	 all	 along.	 Babur’s	 passion	 for	 Samarkand	 –	 which	 had	 never	 truly
belonged	to	him	–	had	blinded	him.	Now	he	must	pay	for	his	folly,	forget	Samarkand	and	begin	again	from
Kabul	to	seek	other	lands	in	which	to	satisfy	his	ambition	for	empire.
But	he	had	one	small	consolation.	He	had	returned	the	shah’s	stud	stallion	–	gelded.

	
	
	

Part	IV
Land	of	Dust	and	Diamonds

	
	
	

Chapter	20
Turkish	Fire
	

On	 a	 day	 of	 shimmering	 heat	 in	 the	 summer	 of	 1522,	 Babur’s	 sons	 were	 in	 the	 meadows	 beneath	 the
walls	of	the	citadel	of	Kabul.	Fourteen-year-old	Humayun	was	galloping	his	horse	–	a	chestnut	mare	with
shining	coat	and	white	fetlocks	–	through	the	long	golden	grasses,	firing	from	the	saddle	at	a	row	of	straw
targets.	He	was	keeping	perfect	balance	as	he	drew	arrow	after	arrow	from	his	quiver,	fitted	them	to	his
tight,	double-curved	bow	and	sent	them	flying	through	the	air.	Each	hit	its	mark.	Kamran,	on	his	roughcoated	pony,	was	watching	his	half-brother	with	respect.	Babur	saw	him	gasp	as	Humayun	looked	up	into
the	bright	blue	skies	and,	so	fast	it	was	hard	to	see	him	do	it,	unleashed	another	arrow	to	bring	down	a
bird.
Babur	smiled.	Even	from	his	vantage-point	high	on	the	battlements	he	could	sense	Humayun’s	pleasure
and	 his	 desire	 to	 show	 off	 –	 it	 was	 in	 the	 casual	 grace	 with	 which	 he	 held	 himself	 on	 his	 horse,	 the
straightness	of	his	back,	the	carriage	of	his	handsome	head.	He	looked	every	inch	a	warrior	prince	and
knew	it.	But	Kamran,	just	five	months	younger,	was	also	growing	up.	Like	his	half-brother,	he	would	be
tall	 and,	 though	 not	 so	 powerfully	 built,	 was	 utterly	 fearless	 –	 a	 quality	 that	 had	 already	 led	 to	 several
accidents.
Babur	was	glad	his	mother	had	lived	long	enough	to	see	the	two	boys	and	to	be	reunited	with	Khanzada
–	 something	 that	 in	 her	 heart	 he	 knew	 she’d	 despaired	 of.	 With	 her	 daughter’s	 return	 to	 Kabul,	 Kutlugh
Nigar	had	revived	like	a	parched	meadow	after	the	rains.	What	Khanzada	had	told	her	of	her	sufferings	at
the	hands	of	Shaibani	Khan,	Babur	could	only	guess.	Sometimes	he’d	seen	a	stricken	look	in	his	mother’s
eyes	as	she	had	gazed	at	her	daughter.	Khanzada	must	have	seen	it	too.	He	had	noticed	how	tender	and
cheerful	 Khanzada	 was	 with	 her,	 as	 if	 she	 was	 trying	 to	 reassure	 her	 that,	 despite	 everything,	 her	 inner
spirit	 was	 not	 broken.	 On	 one	 matter	 only	 Khanzada	 had	 refused	 to	 gratify	 her	 mother.	 Kutlugh	 Nigar
would	dearly	have	loved	to	see	her	daughter	marry	again	as	a	way	of	extinguishing	the	past	but,	in	her
gentle	way,	Khanzada	had	rebuffed	any	such	suggestion,	however	good	the	man,	however	prestigious	the
alliance.
Kutlugh	 Nigar’s	 death	 seven	 years	 ago	 had	 been	 as	 sudden	 as	 his	 grandmother’s.	 She	 had	 been
embroidering	 the	 border	 of	 a	 cotton	 robe	 in	 her	 apartments	 as	 Khanzada	 read	 to	 her	 and	 had	 simply
slumped	 forward	 with	 a	 little	 sigh	 that	 proved	 to	 have	 been	 her	 last	 breath.	 Her	 spirit	 had	 passed	 and
there	had	been	nothing	the	hakim	could	do.	A	few	hours	later	Babur,	unable	to	hold	back	his	tears,	had
seen	 her	 buried	 next	 to	 Esan	 Dawlat	 in	 the	 hillside	 garden	 he	 had	 laid	 out	 when	 he	 had	 first	 come	 to
Kabul.	 He	 had	 made	 a	 vow	 never	 to	 forget	 how,	 through	 his	 blackest,	 most	 dangerous	 moments,	 his
grandmother	and	mother	had	supported	and	guided	him	and	that	without	them	he	would	have	had	no	throne
at	all	.	.	.	It	still	saddened	him	that	neither	had	lived	to	see	his	youngest	sons.
He	 turned	 his	 gaze	 to	 where	 six-year-old	 Askari	 appeared	 to	 be	 tormenting	 his	 three-year-old	 halfbrother	Hindal	with	a	pointed	stick.	Their	nurse	was	trying	to	take	the	stick	away	and	Babur	saw	Askari’s
pointed	little	face	screw	up	in	a	yell	of	defiance,	which	only	provoked	a	sound	cuff	on	the	ear	at	which	he
surrendered	his	weapon	and	started	to	howl.	Hindal	–	now	that	his	nurse	had	intervened	to	protect	him	–

was	watching	his	brother’s	discomfort	with	huge	amusement	on	his	round,	chubby	face.
He	was	lucky	to	have	so	many	healthy	sons,	Babur	thought,	and	to	have	a	rich,	secure	kingdom.	In	the
ten	years	since	he	had	relinquished	Samarkand,	he	had	continued	to	rule	Kabul,	quelling	any	opposition
swiftly	 and	 winning	 his	 people’s	 respect	 for	 his	 ability	 to	 stamp	 on	 the	 brigand	 tribes	 that	 infested	 the
kotals	–	the	high,	narrow	passes	around	Kabul	–	and	preyed	on	the	caravans.	The	Khugiani,	Khirilji,	Turi
and	 Landar	 bandits	 had	 all	 had	 cause	 to	 regret	 their	 crimes.	 Their	 severed	 heads,	 cemented	 into	 high
towers	overlooking	the	passes,	were	a	warning	to	others	and	reassured	the	anxious	traveller	that	he	was
entering	a	kingdom	in	which	the	ruler	ruled.
The	treasuries	were	full,	as	the	faithful,	quietly	efficient	Kasim	–	guardian	of	the	Royal	Treasuries	in
place	of	Wali	Gul,	whose	aged	mind	had	finally	wandered	too	far	–	proudly	reported	to	Babur	each	day
of	 the	 new	 moon.	 Kabul’s	 merchants,	 feasting	 on	 roasted	 camel	 to	 celebrate	 every	 safe	 arrival	 of	 a
caravan	train,	felt	wealthy	and	secure.	They	might	be	happy	but	was	he?	Esan	Dawlat	–	of	all	the	women
of	his	family	the	one	who	had	understood	him	best	–	would	have	known	instinctively	the	answer	–	that	he
was	not.
Looking	at	his	sons,	Babur	felt	with	renewed	sharpness	the	unfulfilled	longing	that	never	quite	left	him.
What	would	their	future	be?	He	had	survived	so	much,	learned	so	many	lessons	as	a	fighter	and	a	leader
of	 men.	 His	 experiences	 had	 taught	 him	 never	 to	 despair,	 never	 to	 allow	 setbacks	 to	 diminish	 his
ambition.	 And	 that	 ambition	 was	 still	 for	 something	 greater	 than	 Kabul	 .	 .	 .	 something	 magnificent	 to
bequeath	to	his	sons	and	their	sons	after	them	.	.	.
‘Majesty,	we	have	reports	of	a	group	of	riders	approaching	Kabul	from	the	west.’	Baisanghar’s	words
interrupted	Babur’s	reverie.	As	usual	he	looked	anxious.	When	the	elderly	Bahlul	Ayyub	had	died	in	his
sleep,	Babur	had	not	hesitated	to	make	Baisanghar	grand	vizier	of	Kabul	–	consolation	to	him	for	his	short
tenure	as	grand	vizier	of	Samarkand.
‘What	are	they?	Merchants?’
‘I’m	not	sure,	Majesty.	They	are	following	the	caravan	route,	but	they’ve	only	a	few	pack-mules	–	no
more	than	they’d	need	to	carry	their	tents.	Yet	our	informants	say	they	have	two	great	carts	 loaded	 with
some	curious	metal	contraptions	and	each	pulled	by	thirty	oxen	.	.	.’
‘How	many	men	are	there?’
‘Perhaps	fifty,	and	strangely	dressed	in	leather	tunics	with	high,	conical	hats	wound	about	with	bright
orange	cloth	.	.	.’
‘A	group	of	travelling	acrobats,	perhaps	.	.	.’
‘I	think	not,	Majesty.’
‘I	was	joking,	Baisanghar.	Have	them	kept	under	surveillance.	When	will	they	be	here?’
‘In	three	days,	perhaps	four.’
‘Let	 me	 know	 when	 they	 arrive.’	 All	 kinds	 of	 people	 passed	 through	 Kabul	 –	 Mongolians	 in
embroidered	brocade	tunics	with	green	leather	bowcases	and	saddles,	straggle-bearded	Chinamen	with
their	air	of	impenetrable	superiority,	swarthy-faced,	thick-set	merchants	from	Mesopotamia,	as	jealous	as
any	 Afghan	 tribesmen	 of	 their	 honour	 and	 as	 quick	 to	 pick	 a	 fight,	 and	 dark-skinned,	 bright-turbaned
dealers	 in	 sugar	 and	 spices	 from	 deep	 inside	 Hindustan.	 If	 these	 new	 arrivals	 were	 interesting	 he’d
summon	them	to	the	citadel	.	.	.	It	might	amuse	Humayun	and	Kamran	to	see	visitors	from	some	far-off
place.
In	fact,	Baisanghar’s	estimate	was	wrong.	Just	two	days	later,	on	a	day	of	thin,	grey	drizzle,	the	party
and	its	mysterious	wagons	were	spotted	approaching	Kabul.	They	ignored	the	city	but	pressed	on	up	the
steep	road	to	the	citadel.	Watching	from	the	balcony	of	his	private	apartments,	Babur	could	see	the	two
wagons	sliding	about	in	the	oozing	mud	that	the	rain	had	created	from	the	normal	layer	of	dust.	Whatever

was	inside	them	seemed	to	be	covered	with	thick	felt	against	the	weather.	The	bullocks	were	struggling,
their	heads	low	beneath	the	heavy	wooden	yoke,	their	shoulders	straining.
The	leading	rider,	a	tall	man	with	his	face	wrapped	in	a	dark	cloth	against	the	penetrating	rain,	looked
back	at	the	struggling	beasts.	Babur	saw	him	wave.	He	was	no	doubt	shouting	instructions	because	eight
of	the	men	at	once	dismounted	and	began	pushing	the	carts	from	the	back.	One	slipped	and	fell	face	down
in	the	mud.
The	leader	seemed	to	lose	patience.	He	turned	his	grey	horse	and	kicked	it	on	up	the	slope.	Reaching
the	steep,	paved	ramp	leading	up	to	the	first	entrance	gate	to	the	citadel,	he	seemed	to	be	urging	his	mount
to	 go	 still	 faster.	 Only	 when	 two	 guards	 leaped	 in	 front	 of	 him	 did	 he	 bring	 it	 to	 an	 abrupt,	 slithering
standstill.	 On	 his	 balcony,	 Babur	 couldn’t	 hear	 what	 was	 being	 said	 but	 everything	 about	 the	 man
suggested	 this	 was	 no	 merchant	 but	 a	 warrior.	 The	 angle	 of	 his	 head	 as	 he	 responded	 to	 the	 guards’
questions	was	arrogant,	and	as	he	impatiently	flung	back	his	wet	travelling	cloak,	Babur	glimpsed	the	hilt
of	a	sword	in	a	strangely	shaped	scabbard	–	curved	like	a	scimitar	but	narrower.
‘Guards,’	Babur	shouted	from	his	balcony,	‘bring	that	man	to	me	now.’
Five	minutes	later,	with	four	guards	in	front	of	him,	six	behind,	the	man	entered.	His	cloak	had	been
taken	from	him	and	so	had	his	sword	–	the	curved	steel	scabbard	hanging	from	the	thin	metal	chain	at	his
waist	swung	empty.	But	the	cloth	still	concealed	the	lower	part	of	the	man’s	face	and	his	conical	hat	was
pulled	low	over	his	brow.	The	guards	allowed	him	no	closer	to	Babur	than	twenty	feet.
‘On	your	knees	before	the	king!’
The	man	not	only	knelt	but	spreadeagled	himself	full-length	on	the	floor	in	front	of	Babur	in	the	full,
formal	Timurid	salute	of	the	korunush.
‘You	may	stand.’	Babur	was	more	curious	than	ever.	Why	should	a	man	who	had	demanded	entry	to	his
citadel	 as	 if	 of	 right	 perform	 such	 obeisance	 unasked?	 And,	 even	 more	 curious,	 why	 was	 he	 still	 face
down,	arms	extended?	Hadn’t	he	understood	what	Babur	had	said?
One	of	the	guards	was	about	to	jab	him	with	the	butt	of	his	spear	but	Babur	held	up	a	restraining	hand.
Feeling	for	his	dagger,	he	walked	slowly	towards	the	man	until	he	was	standing	over	him.	‘I	said	you	may
rise.’
A	quiver	ran	through	the	recumbent	figure.	After	a	moment’s	hesitation	the	man	pushed	himself	back	on
to	his	heels	but	kept	his	head	bowed.	Then,	slowly,	he	raised	his	face,	and	above	the	dusty,	sweat-stained
cloth	Babur	saw	a	pair	of	indigo	eyes.
‘Baburi!’	He	couldn’t	quite	believe	it,	not	after	all	these	years.	Stooping	he	grabbed	Baburi’s	arm	and
pulled	him	upright.	The	face	was	more	lined,	but	those	high	cheekbones,	those	intensely	dark	blue	eyes
were	unmistakable.
As	Babur	continued	to	stare,	Baburi	pulled	off	his	sodden	headdress	releasing	long	dark	hair	that	was
now	touched	with	grey.	‘Forgive	me	.	.	.’	The	words	seemed	to	come	hard	to	Baburi	and	his	eyes	were
shining	very	brightly.
Babur	raised	a	hand.	‘Wait	.	.	.’	He	signalled	to	the	guards	to	go	and	waited	until	the	double	oak	doors
had	 closed	 behind	 them	 before	 turning	 back	 to	 his	 erstwhile	 friend.	 ‘I	 don’t	 understand	 .	 .	 .’	 Baburi
flushed.	‘I’ve	come	back	to	ask	your	forgiveness.	I	left	when	I	shouldn’t	have	done.	I	knew	it	–	even	in	the
first	hours	–	but	pride	wouldn’t	let	me	return	.	.	.’
‘No	.	.	.’	Babur	gripped	Baburi’s	arm	tighter.	‘I	should	ask	your	pardon.	You	were	right	–	everything
you	said	was	right.	I	was	the	one	with	the	pride,	not	you.	I	thought	Samarkand	belonged	to	me,	that	it	was
my	destiny,	that	any	price,	even	doing	the	shah’s	bidding,	was	worth	paying.	I	should	have	listened	to	you
.	.	.	I	couldn’t	hold	the	city	for	even	a	year.	The	people	preferred	even	the	barbarian	Uzbeks	to	me	.	.	.’
‘But	I	was	your	friend	.	.	.	I	knew	you	needed	me	and	I	failed	you.	All	these	years	I’ve	felt	the	shame	of

it	.	.	.’	Baburi’s	voice	shook	a	little.
‘You	were	the	only	man	who	was	ever	completely	honest	with	me	–	the	only	one	who	could	forget	I
was	a	king	and	with	whom	I	could	be	myself	.	.	.	and	I	did	need	you.	I	searched	for	you	.	.	.	I	never	forgot
you	.	.	.	I	hoped	you’d	come	back	one	day	but	then	I	ceased	to	hope	.	.	.	I	feared	you	might	even	be	dead.’
‘How	could	I	return	unless	I	had	some	way	of	making	amends?’
Babur	let	go	of	him.	‘I	never	did	understand	you	.	.	.’
‘No.	We’ve	always	seen	the	world	differently	and	we	always	will.’
‘So	why	come	back	to	me	now,	after	all	this	time?’
‘Because	at	last	I	can	give	you	something.	For	the	past	eight	years	I’ve	been	in	the	army	of	the	Sultan	of
Turkey.	I	rose	high	and	I	did	him	a	service.	In	a	battle	I	saved	the	life	of	his	son.	He	asked	how	he	could
reward	me	–	and	then	I	knew	the	time	had	come	when	I	could	return.	Listen	.	.	.’	Baburi’s	eyes,	so	sombre
a	moment	ago,	were	gleaming.	‘The	Turks	have	weapons	of	a	type	unknown	in	our	world.	With	them	you
can	 do	 anything,	 conquer	 anybody.	 I’ve	 brought	 some	 to	 you	 and	 I’ve	 brought	 you	 Turkish	 mercenaries
who,	 like	 me,	 know	 how	 to	 use	 them.	 Together	 we	 can	 train	 your	 army	 .	 .	 .	 so	 that	 you	 can	 fulfil	 that
destiny	of	yours	that	you	carry	like	a	millstone	round	your	neck	.	.	.’	As	he	said	these	last	words,	Baburi
grinned	and	Babur	saw	again	the	street-wise	companion	whose	sound	common	sense	could	wound	like	a
barb	but	should	never	be	ignored.	‘What	are	these	weapons?’
‘Have	you	heard	of	bombards	–	cannon,	they	sometimes	call	them	–	or	matchlock	muskets?’
Babur	shook	his	head.
‘They	are	devices	so	powerful	that	eight	years	ago	–	just	before	I	joined	the	Turkish	sultan’s	army	–	his
forces	 used	 them	 to	 defeat	 Shah	 Ismail	 of	 Persia	 at	 the	 battle	 of	 Chaltran,	 depriving	 him	 of	 much	 of
Mesopotamia	and	fixing	his	borders.	I	talked	to	men	who	were	there.	They	say	thousand	upon	thousand	of
the	shah’s	Kizil-Bashi	–	the	Redhead	cavalry	–	were	cut	down	like	poppies	in	the	field.	The	weapons	use
the	same	black	powder	as	we	do	when	we	lay	mines	beneath	the	walls	of	places	we	are	besieging,	but	in
Turkey	they	have	a	new	name	for	it,	“gunpowder”,	and	a	new	use.	You’ll	be	amazed	.	.	.’
But	Babur	wasn’t	really	listening.	It	was	only	just	beginning	to	sink	in	that	the	friend	he	had	missed	so
much	through	all	these	years,	his	irreplaceable	brother-in-arms,	had	come	back.	Looking	at	Baburi,	all	the
burdens	 of	 kingship,	 the	 disappointments	 and	 frustrations	 fell	 away.	 In	 their	 place	 came	 such	 a	 riotous
rush	of	feelings,	such	a	wild	joy	that	he	felt	he	might	choke.	Whatever	Baburi	was	saying	didn’t	matter	.	.	.
As	if	he	had	read	Babur’s	mind,	Baburi	fell	silent.	For	a	moment	they	just	stared	at	one	another.	Then,
instinctively,	 they	 leaped	 forward	 to	 embrace,	 half	 laughing,	 half	 crying.	 Babur	 felt	 young	 again,	 filled
with	the	wonder	of	the	moment	and	with	no	thought	of	tomorrow.

‘Tell	me	what	these	years	have	brought	you,	Baburi.	Do	you	have	wives	.	.	.	sons?’	Babur	asked	that	night,
as	they	sat	alone	in	his	private	apartments.	He	could	still	hardly	believe	that	Baburi	was	with	him.	He
was	half	afraid	that	if	he	blinked	he	would	find	him	gone.
‘I	told	you	many	years	ago	that	I	had	no	wish	for	wives	or	children	.	.	.’
‘But	don’t	you	want	sons	to	carry	on	your	name?	Who	will	remember	you	when	you	are	gone?’
‘Friends	like	you,	perhaps.	That	would	be	enough	.	.	.’	Baburi	paused.	‘Anyway,	a	man	would	need	a
more	settled	existence	than	mine	if	he	wished	to	marry.’
‘Where	did	you	go	after	you	left	Kabul?’
‘I	guessed	you’d	look	for	me	so	I	went	where	you	couldn’t	find	me.	I	joined	a	caravan	of	merchants

travelling	 westward	 to	 Isfahan.	 It	 was	 a	 long,	 difficult,	 sometimes	 dangerous	 journey	 –	 Uzbeks	 and
marauding	nomad	tribes	attacked	us.	By	the	time	we	finally	reached	Isfahan,	some	of	the	merchants	had
been	killed	and	their	goods	plundered	but	my	skill	as	a	warrior	had	attracted	notice.	The	caravan	master
asked	me	to	travel	on	with	a	group	of	merchants	carrying	wool	and	silks	northwards	to	Tabriz.	There	I
learned	 you	 had	 been	 driven	 out	 of	 Samarkand	 and	 that	 the	 Shah	 of	 Persia	 was	 no	 longer	 your	 ally.	 I
almost	 returned	 but	 somehow	 I	 couldn’t	 .	 .	 .	 perhaps	 it	 was	 pride	 .	 .	 .	 perhaps	 I	 was	 uncertain	 of	 my
welcome	 .	 .	 .	 I	 don’t	 know	 .	 .	 .	 Then	 I	 heard	 that	 the	 Sultan	 of	 Turkey	 was	 recruiting	 mercenaries	 and
paying	them	well.	I	joined	a	group	of	wanderers	like	myself,	some	from	as	far	north	as	the	borders	of	the
Caspian	Sea,	and	together	we	made	our	way	to	Istanbul.’
‘	To	enlist	in	the	sultan’s	wars	.	.	.’
‘Yes,	though	I’d	rather	have	been	fighting	yours	.	.	.	being	proved	right	about	Samarkand	and	the	shah
gave	me	no	pleasure.	I	often	thought	how	hard	it	must	have	been	for	you	to	lose	it	again	.	.	.’
‘I	deserved	it	.	.	.’
For	a	moment	they	bowed	their	heads,	lost	in	memories.	Then	Baburi	seemed	to	shake	himself	out	of	it.
‘I’ve	heard	you’ve	taken	more	wives	and	that	you’ve	two	more	fine	healthy	sons	as	well	as	Humayun	and
Kamran?’
‘True.’
‘What	a	family	man	you’ve	become.	It	seems	a	long	time	since	you	and	I	rode	with	fire	in	our	loins	to
the	village	whorehouses	.	.	.	do	you	remember	Yadgar?’
‘Of	course.’	Babur	grinned.	‘Sometimes	I	wonder	what	became	of	her.	I	hope	she	didn’t	fall	prey	to	the
Uzbeks.’
‘Is	Maham	still	a	beauty?’
‘She	is	–	she’s	not	grown	fat	–	and	Gulrukh	is	still	plain.	What	did	you	expect	.	.	.	?	Maham	is	still	the
one	I	care	for	most,	the	one	I	most	desire,	but	.	.	.’	Babur	hesitated	‘.	.	.	she	did	not	become	the	companion
I	had	at	first	hoped	for.	Our	bodies	and	affections	meet,	but	not	always	our	minds	.	.	.	I	could	talk	to	my
grandmother,	my	mother	and	Khanzada	about	anything	–	appointments,	campaigns	–	but	not	Maham.	She
really	doesn’t	understand	.	.	.	isn’t	really	interested	.	.	.’
‘Perhaps	 you	 expected	 too	 much.	 The	 women	 of	 your	 family	 were	 brought	 up	 to	 know	 about	 such
things.’
‘It’s	more	than	that.’
‘What	d’you	mean?’
‘Maham’s	been	unhappy.	After	Humayun	she	had	no	more	children	that	survived.	Despite	three	further
pregnancies,	 two	 were	 stillborn	 and	 the	 third	 –	 a	 son	 –	 died	 in	 my	 arms	 just	 minutes	 after	 my	 hakim
summoned	me	to	Maham’s	chamber.	She	was	exhausted.	I	watched	the	light	in	her	eyes	fade	as	the	new
son	we’d	both	longed	for	struggled	for	breath	then	went	still.	When	I	look	back,	it’s	as	if	something	died
in	her,	too,	at	that	moment.’
‘She	has	Humayun	.	.	.’
‘Yes.	But	she	still	feels	she’s	failed	.	.	.	Even	though	she	loves	me	and	I	care	for	her,	it’s	cast	a	shadow
between	us.’
‘Is	that	why	you	took	more	wives?	For	companionship?	To	find	a	soul-mate?’
‘I	 had	 no	 such	 expectations.	 I	 married	 again	 for	 practical	 reasons.	 It’s	 good	 for	 a	 king	 to	 have	 many
heirs	and	it	was	a	way	to	reward	loyal	followers	and	bind	powerful	clans	to	me.’
‘These	new	wives	of	yours,	what	are	they	like?’
Babur	thought	of	tall,	muscular	Bibi	Mubarak,	daughter	of	the	powerful	chieftain	of	the	Yusufzai	clan
from	the	mountains	above	Kabul,	and	of	fat	little	snub-nosed	Dildar,	whose	father	had	fled	the	Uzbeks	in

Herat	 and	 made	 the	 long	 journey	 to	 Kabul	 to	 offer	 his	 allegiance.	 ‘They’re	 not	 amazingly	 beautiful,	 if
that’s	what	you	mean.	But	they	are	good	women	.	.	.’
‘Good	in	bed?’
‘Good	enough	.	.	.’
‘Which	are	the	mothers	of	your	two	youngest	sons?’
‘Six	years	ago	Gulrukh	gave	birth	to	a	brother	for	Kamran,	little	Askari.	Then	three	years	later,	Dildar
also	had	a	boy.’
‘And	Maham?	It	must	have	been	hard	for	her.’
Babur’s	face	tightened.	‘It	was	.	.	.	Years	ago,	as	a	new	young	wife	with	everything	ahead	of	her,	she
accepted	my	marriage	to	Gulrukh	without	question.	But	her	grief	when	I	took	other	wives	was	unnatural.
When	rumours	spread	that	they	might	be	pregnant	her	sorrow	was	uncontrollable.	Not	even	Baisanghar,
her	own	father,	or	Khanzada	could	quieten	her.	One	night	she	attempted	to	cut	her	wrists	with	the	shards	of
a	broken	pot.	My	hakim	had	to	sedate	her	with	a	potent	mixture	of	wine	and	narcotic	kamali	.	.	.’
‘And	is	she	still	so	unhappy?’
‘No	 .	 .	 .	 and	 there’s	 a	 reason.	 About	 four	 years	 ago,	 while	 I	 was	 away	 on	 an	 expedition	 along	 the
borders	of	Hindustan,	Maham	wrote	telling	me	that	Dildar	was	pregnant.	Her	letter	ended,	“Whether	it	is
a	boy	or	a	girl,	I	will	take	my	chances.	Give	the	child	to	me	and	I	will	raise	it	as	my	own	and	be	content
once	more.”’
‘What	did	you	do?’
‘It	 was	 difficult.	 I	 knew	 I	 was	 wronging	 Dildar	 but	 how	 could	 I	 deny	 Maham	 something	 that	 might
comfort	 her?	 I	 wrote	 back	 that	 though	 the	 child	 was	 still	 in	 Dildar’s	 womb,	 it	 was	 hers.	 As	 I	 said,	 it
turned	out	to	be	a	boy	.	.	.’
‘What’s	his	name?’
‘Hindal.’
Baburi’s	eyes	flickered.	‘Which	means	Conqueror	of	Hindustan.’
‘I	 chose	 it	 in	 a	 moment	 of	 euphoria.	 The	 news	 of	 his	 birth	 came	 while	 I	 was	 still	 away	 on	 that
expedition.	Perhaps	it	was	wishful	thinking,	but	I	took	it	as	a	sign	that	Hindustan,	with	its	great	wealth,	its
great	possibilities,	was	where	my	destiny	lay,	if	only	I	could	find	a	way	.	.	.’
‘Just	 as	 we	 talked	 about	 all	 those	 years	 ago	 when	 we	 raided	 its	 borders.	 Do	 you	 remember	 those
seemingly	limitless	skies,	that	intensely	orange	sun?’
‘Of	course	–	and	the	lake	we	saw	filled	with	thousands	of	birds,	wings	as	red	as	if	they’d	been	dipped
in	blood	.	.	.	They	were	hard	to	forget.’	Babur	rose	from	the	yellow	brocade	cushions	he’d	been	leaning
against	 and	 went	 over	 to	 an	 open	 casement.	 Torches	 flickered	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 gatehouse	 in	 the
courtyard	below	where	all	was	quiet,	as	it	should	be	in	the	darkest	hours	of	the	night.	‘But	Hindal	is	three
now	and	I’m	no	closer	to	realising	my	dreams	of	a	great	empire	in	Hindustan	or	anywhere	else	.	.	.	I	know
I	 should	 be	 grateful	 for	 what	 I’ve	 got.	 When	 they	 look	 at	 me,	 my	 nobles	 and	 commanders	 –	 even
Baisanghar,	who	has	been	with	me	all	these	years	–	see	a	king	secure	on	his	throne	with	little	to	trouble
him.	 They	 don’t	 understand	 the	 dissatisfaction	 and	 lack	 of	 fulfilment	 that	 envelop	 me.	 And	 why	 should
they?	I	can	never	tell	them	.	.	.’
‘What	about	Khanzada?	Surely	your	sister	knows	you	too	well	to	be	fooled.’
‘She	suspects	my	restlessness	–	I’m	sure	of	it.	But	after	all	she	has	been	through,	I	didn’t	want	to	load
her	with	my	gnawing	ambitions	and	selfish	preoccupations	–	so	paltry	in	comparison	with	her	sufferings
.	.	.	And	I	couldn’t	talk	of	it	to	Maham,	she	just	wouldn’t	understand	.	.	.	whenever	I	try	to	speak	to	her	of
my	dissatisfaction	she	becomes	upset	as	if	I	were	criticising	her.	If	you’d	been	here,	it	might	have	been
different.	 It’s	 hard	 to	 describe	 to	 you	 what	 my	 life	 has	 become.	 I	 have	 absolute	 power	 and	 live	 in

opulence	 but	 sometimes	 this	 enviable	 existence	 feels	 like	 unfulfilling	 drudgery	 with	 nothing	 to	 look
forward	 to	 except	 more	 of	 the	 same.	 Often,	 to	 deaden	 my	 discontent,	 I	 hold	 drinking	 parties	 with	 my
nobles	where	we	sample	the	potent	vintages	of	my	kingdom	–	like	this	red	wine	of	Ghazni	that	we	are
drinking	 now.	 We	 revel	 till	 dawn	 when	 my	 attendants	 carry	 me,	 head	 bobbing	 in	 oblivion,	 back	 to	 my
apartments.	 Sometimes	 I	 take	 opium	 and	 bhang	 –	 marijuana.	 They	 take	 me	 to	 a	 bright,	 vibrant	 world
where	everything	seems	possible.’
‘There’s	no	shame	in	that.’
‘But	where’s	the	nobility?	Where’s	the	glory	my	soul	still	hankers	for?	I’m	scarcely	four	decades	old
but	I	feel	as	trapped	as	my	father	did	in	Ferghana.	What’s	more,	the	old	Timurid	world	–	my	world,	our
world	 –	 is	 gone.	 The	 Uzbek	 barbarians	 have	 shattered	 it	 for	 ever.	 What	 is	 left	 for	 me?’	 Babur’s	 voice
trembled.	He	turned	to	Baburi	and,	after	a	pause,	added,	‘I	know	I	must	seem	ungrateful	and	conceited	.	.	.
I’ve	never	said	these	things	to	anyone	and	perhaps	I	shouldn’t	be	saying	them	to	you	.	.	.	you	used	to	mock
my	moments	of	doubt	.	.	.’
‘No,	not	your	doubt,	only	your	self-pity.	But	my	life	these	past	years	has	taught	me	many	things.	I	was
so	arrogant,	so	convinced	I	was	right.	I	had	far	more	pride	than	you,	though	you	were	the	king,	not	I.	Now
I	understand	.	.	.	I	know	how	it	feels	to	want	something	badly	and	be	unable	to	find	a	way	to	it.’
‘What	was	it	you	wanted	so	much?’
‘To	come	back	.	.	.’
‘You’ll	stay?’
‘Yes	.	.	.	at	least,	until	we	have	another	fight	.	.	.’

Baburi	slapped	the	end	of	the	five-foot-long	bronze	tube.	‘This	is	the	barrel.	First	linen	bags	filled	with
gunpowder	and	then	the	shot	are	loaded	and	rammed	down	into	it.	And	this,’	he	pointed	to	the	swelling	at
the	bottom	end	of	the	barrel,	‘is	the	breech.	See	this	little	aperture?	They	call	it	the	touch-hole.	It	is	where
–	 just	 before	 firing	 –	 the	 gunners	 insert	 a	 long,	 sharp	 metal	 spike	 –	 the	 awl	 –	 to	 break	 open	 the	 bag	 of
powder.	Finally,	a	man	applies	a	lighted	taper	to	the	touch-hole	to	create	the	flashing	spark	that	sets	off
the	main	charge	in	the	barrel.’
‘How	far	can	it	throw	the	shot?’
‘It	depends	on	the	length	of	the	barrel	and	its	diameter	–	the	bore.	The	longer	the	barrel	and	the	bigger
the	bore,	the	further	the	range.	Many	of	the	Turkish	sultan’s	guns	have	barrels	ten	feet	long	or	more	and
some	weigh	as	much	as	twenty	thousand	pounds.	But	they’re	small	compared	with	the	bronze	cannon	they
call	the	Great	Turkish	Bombard	that	Mehmet	of	Turkey	used	seventy	years	ago	when	he	captured	Istanbul.
You	 should	 see	 it!	 The	 seventeen-foot	 barrel	 has	 a	 thirty-inch	 bore	 and	 it	 could	 fire	 a	 twelve-hundredpound	stone	shot	over	a	mile	away.	They	say	you	could	hear	its	blast	ten	miles	off.	But	it	could	only	fire
about	fifteen	shots	a	day	and	needed	two	hundred	men	to	operate	it.	It	was	so	heavy	it	took	seventy	oxen
and	ten	thousand	men	to	shift	it,	unlike	this	one.’
‘Show	me	what	it	can	do	.	.	.’	Babur	wanted	to	see	the	miracle	weapon	at	work.	The	target	was	a	tenfoot-high	pile	of	large	stones	that	Baburi’s	men	had	set	up	three	hundred	yards	away.
Baburi	shouted	an	order	to	five	of	his	mercenaries,	who	were	wearing	round	leather	skull-caps,	leather
jerkins	and	breeches.	One	man	rammed	a	linen	bag	down	the	barrel	of	the	cannon	into	the	breech	with	a
long	stick	like	a	polo	mallet,	except	that	the	top	was	wrapped	in	sheepskin.	Then	another	two,	grunting
with	 the	 effort,	 heaved	 a	 round	 stone	 shot	 into	 the	 barrel	 and	 –	 again	 using	 the	 stick	 –	 sent	 it	 rumbling

down	into	the	breech.	As	they	finished,	the	fourth	man	approached	and	inserted	the	awl	to	puncture	the
bag	 of	 powder	 inside	 and	 scattered	 a	 little	 loose	 powder	 around	 the	 touch-hole	 –	 ‘Just	 to	 make	 sure,’
Baburi	explained.
‘Stand	back.’	He	waited	till	he	was	content	that	Babur	was	far	enough	away,	then	walked	forward	to
the	cannon	and	checked	the	angle	of	the	barrel.
Satisfied,	he	stepped	back	and	signalled	to	the	fifth	man	to	advance.	He	held	a	forked	staff	with	a	length
of	oil-soaked	cord	attached	to	it,	the	tip	glowing.	The	man	looked	towards	Baburi.
‘Fire!’
The	man	pressed	his	smouldering	taper	to	the	touch-hole	and	leaped	back.	Seconds	later,	with	a	boom
the	missile	shot	out	of	the	barrel	and	across	the	meadow	to	smash	into	the	target.	A	cloud	of	dust	erupted,
and	as	it	cleared,	Babur	saw	that	the	tower	of	stones	was	now	a	pile	of	fragments.
‘Look	at	that.’	Baburi’s	voice	was	full	of	pride.	‘At	Chaltran,	Sultan	Selim	used	a	row	of	cannon	just
like	these,	protected	by	a	barrier	of	carts,	and	there	was	nothing	the	Persians	could	do	.	.	.	Afterwards,	the
Turks	surged	forward,	and	shot	down	any	Persians	who	still	resisted	with	their	matchlock	muskets.	Look
.	.	.’
Baburi	clapped	his	hands	and	one	of	his	men	carried	over	a	long,	thin	wooden	box	that	he	placed	at	his
feet.	‘You	taught	me	a	long	time	ago	to	be	an	archer.	You	made	me	a	Qor	Begi,	a	Lord	of	the	Bow.	Now	I
can	teach	you	to	be	a	marksman	with	one	of	these.’	Baburi	bent	and	took	a	long	metal	object	from	the	box.
‘It’s	fashioned	from	the	finest	steel.’
‘It’s	shaped	like	a	little	cannon.’
‘Exactly.	It’s	a	musket	–	a	cannon	in	miniature.	See,	it	has	a	long	metal	barrel	for	firing	a	ball.	This
matchlock	mechanism,	as	it’s	called,	is	how	it	works.	You	put	the	gunpowder	here,	into	the	pan,	then	light
the	end	of	a	thin	piece	of	rope.	When	the	flame	reaches	the	gunpowder,	it	ignites	it	and	the	force	fires	the
ball	from	the	barrel.’
‘How	far?’
‘More	than	two	hundred	yards	but	it’s	most	accurate	up	to	about	fifty.	Try	it.’
As	soon	as	one	of	the	Turks	had	set	up	a	melon	on	a	pole	as	a	target,	Baburi	poured	a	small	amount	of
gunpowder	 into	 the	 pan	 and	 loaded	 the	 shot.	 ‘	 To	 help	 take	 the	 weight	 as	 you	 aim,	 you	 should	 rest	 the
barrel	on	this	frame.’	Baburi	indicated	a	tall	metal	stick	about	four	feet	high	that	forked	at	the	top	to	make
a	 cradle.	 Thrusting	 the	 end	 of	 the	 stick	 into	 the	 ground,	 he	 showed	 Babur	 how	 to	 rest	 the	 barrel	 of	 the
musket	in	the	centre	of	the	cradle.	‘Look	straight	down	the	barrel	at	your	target	and,	remember,	when	it
fires	you’ll	feel	a	kick,	so	brace	yourself.	Ready?
Babur	took	the	musket,	placing	the	butt	against	his	shoulder,	closed	his	left	eye	and	focused	his	right
along	the	shining	barrel.	When	he	thought	he	had	the	melon	in	his	sights,	he	nodded.	Baburi	lit	the	piece	of
rope,	which	began	to	smoulder.
‘Keep	it	steady	.	.	.’	Baburi	was	still	speaking	as,	with	a	sharp	crack,	the	ball	shot	out	and	the	top	of	the
melon	 disintegrated	 in	 a	 spray	 of	 orange	 pulp	 .	 .	 .	 ‘Good.	 But	 now	 let	 me	 show	 you	 what	 my	 trained
musketeers	can	do	with	these	.	.	.’	He	gestured	to	another	row	of	targets:	fifteen	straw	dolls	lined	up	on	a
trestle	table	some	fifty	yards	away.	An	equal	number	of	Baburi’s	men	lined	up,	primed	and	loaded	their
weapons	 and,	 one	 after	 another,	 fired	 with	 perfect	 precision,	 each	 man	 knocking	 over	 his	 target,	 then
stepping	back	smartly	to	reload	and	stand	to	attention.	Immediately	the	fifteenth	man	had	reloaded,	they
swung	round	a	hundred	and	eighty	degrees,	rested	their	muskets	again	in	the	cradles	and	fired	at	a	row	of
clay	pots	set	up	even	further	away.	Again,	each	man’s	aim	was	perfect.
‘Of	course,	in	the	heat	of	battle,	fingers	fumble,	targets	move,	but	I’ve	seen	these	guns	shatter	advancing
lines	of	soldiers.’

Babur	 put	 his	 arm	 around	 Baburi’s	 shoulders	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 put	 into	 words	 the	 vision	 that	 had	 been
forming	 in	 his	 mind	 as	 he	 had	 watched	 his	 friend	 demonstrate	 the	 power	 of	 these	 miraculous	 new
weapons.	It	was	as	if	Canopus	had	risen	above	the	enshrouding	clouds	to	blaze	brightly	on	him	and	his
dynasty	once	more.
‘You’re	not	just	my	friend.	You’re	my	inspiration.	You’ve	brought	me	far	more	than	weapons	.	.	.	Until
now,	 although	 I’ve	 long	 wished	 to	 make	 one,	 a	 full-scale	 attack	 on	 Hindustan	 was	 not	 possible.	 I	 had
neither	 the	 numbers	 of	 men	 nor	 any	 special	 advantage.	 The	 rulers	 there	 are	 numerous	 and	 strong.	 Their
overlord	 is	 the	 proud,	 arrogant	 Sultan	 Ibrahim	 Lodi	 of	 Delhi.	 To	 win	 Hindustan	 I	 must	 defeat	 his	 huge
armies	and	his	ranks	of	war	elephants.	But	with	these	new	weapons	I	now	see	how	I	can	do	it.	I	may	not
be	destined	to	have	a	great	empire	like	Timur’s	in	the	lands	of	my	birth	but	with	your	cannon	and	muskets
I	can	surpass	his	raid	over	the	Indus	to	Delhi.	We	will	fulfil	the	dreams	we	had	all	those	years	ago.’

	
	
	

Chapter	21
Blood	and	Thunder
	

Dreams	 of	 greatness	 came	 easily.	 Achieving	 it	 was	 harder.	 It	 had	 taken	 Baburi	 and	 his	 Turkish
mercenaries	six	months	to	create	a	corps	of	troops	skilled	at	firing	the	cannon	and	muskets	he	had	brought
to	Kabul.	Meanwhile,	as	the	citizens	of	Kabul	had	grown	used	to	the	flashes	and	booms	around	their	city,
Babur	 had	 despatched	 an	 embassy	 to	 the	 Turkish	 sultan,	 with	 a	 message	 from	 Baburi	 and	 bags	 of	 gold
coin,	to	buy	six	more	cannon	and	four	hundred	muskets	from	the	foundries	and	gun-makers	of	Istanbul.
Even	more	satisfying	to	Babur	had	been	the	knowledge	that	his	own	armourers	were	learning	to	make
the	new	weapons	under	the	expert	guidance	of	Ali-Quli,	the	grey-bearded	Turkish	master-gunner	who	had
accompanied	Baburi	to	Kabul.	His	ability	with	both	cannon	and	musket	was	extraordinary	–	especially	as
five	years	ago,	two	fingers	of	his	right	hand	had	been	blown	off	by	an	exploding	matchlock	with	a	cracked
barrel.
Night	after	night,	Babur	had	sat	late	with	Baburi,	questioning	minutely	his	accounts	of	battles	in	which
cannon	 and	 matchlocks	 had	 been	 deployed.	 In	 what	 circumstances	 were	 they	 most	 effective?	 In	 open
battle	or	siege?	How	could	you	best	protect	your	gunners	and	matchlock	men	against	archers	or	cavalry
charges?	 How	 did	 these	 weapons	 change	 the	 traditional	 methods	 of	 attack?	 Before	 he	 tested	 them	 in
battle,	he	must	understand	everything.
Babur	also	sent	men	out	into	the	city	to	linger	in	the	large,	arched	caravanserais	where	the	merchants	of
many	lands	displayed	their	wares	on	raised	stone	platforms	in	the	middle	of	the	courtyard,	trading	gossip
as	well	as	goods.	Babur’s	agents	listened	carefully,	asking	the	occasional	discreet	question.	They	heard
much	 boastful	 talk	 from	 the	 Hindustani	 merchants	 about	 Delhi’s	 vast	 palaces	 of	 carved	 rose-pink
sandstone	and	the	grandeur	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	court	but	not	the	faintest	rumour	that	he	–	or	any	other	ruler
of	Hindustan	–	had	acquired	cannon	and	matchlock	muskets.
But	now,	at	last,	on	a	cold,	clear	January	day,	Babur	was	leading	an	expedition	to	see	for	himself	the
effect	 of	 these	 weapons	 against	 an	 enemy	 unused	 to	 them.	 That	 enemy	 was	 the	 new	 Sultan	 of	 Bajaur,	 a
dependency	of	Kabul,	who	had	taken	it	into	his	foolish	young	head	to	refuse	Babur	the	customary	annual
tribute	in	grain,	sheep	and	oxen.
The	 Bajauris,	 living	 high	 in	 the	 mountains	 in	 dense	 forests	 of	 oak,	 olive	 and	 wormwood,	 noisy	 with
rasping	mynah	birds,	were	an	idolatrous,	infidel	people	with	strange	beliefs.	When	a	Bajaur	woman	died
the	men	placed	her	corpse	on	a	stretcher	and,	taking	each	of	the	four	corners,	raised	it	up.	If	she	had	lived
a	good	life,	the	Bajaurs	believed	her	spirit	would	cause	the	men	holding	the	stretcher	to	shake	so	violently
that	her	body	would	be	thrown	to	the	ground.	Only	then	would	the	people	don	black	mourning	garb	and
begin	their	lament.	If,	on	the	other	hand,	a	female	corpse	induced	no	such	motion,	it	was	considered	proof
of	an	evil	life	and	the	body	was	tossed	unceremoniously	on	to	a	fire	to	be	reduced	to	nothing.
The	 ruler	 of	 these	 singular	 people	 had	 provided	 him	 with	 a	 fine	 opportunity,	 Babur	 thought,	 as,	 with
Baburi	 by	 his	 side,	 he	 rode	 out	 of	 Kabul	 at	 the	 head	 of	 a	 column	 that	 included	 a	 detachment	 of	 newly
trained	 matchlock	 men	 and	 gunners,	 all	 hand-picked	 by	 Ali-Quli,	 and	 four	 cannon.	 They	 circled
northwards	up	through	hilly	terrain	towards	Bajaur.	In	the	old	days,	Babur	and	his	men	would	have	ridden

fast	and	hard	on	a	raid	like	this,	taking	their	enemy	by	surprise.	But	the	heavy	cannon	in	their	trundling
bullock	carts	slowed	their	pace,	providing	more	opportunity	and	time	for	observers	to	raise	the	alarm.
Babur	brooded	on	this	as	he	rode,	not	noticing	the	chill	wind	in	his	face.	He	was	also	reflecting	on	a
passage	he	had	come	across	in	a	chronicle	shortly	before	leaving	Kabul:	‘Timur	prized	bold	and	valiant
warriors	by	whose	aid	he	opened	the	locks	of	terror	and	ripped	in	pieces	men	like	lions	and	through	them
and	their	battles	overturned	the	heights	of	mountains	.	.	.’	It	also	told	of	Timur’s	loathing	for	cowards.	Any
man,	whatever	his	rank,	who	failed	him	in	battle	had	had	his	head	shaved	and	his	body	painted	red.	Then,
dressed	 in	 women’s	 clothes,	 he	 had	 been	 dragged	 through	 the	 camp	 to	 be	 beaten	 and	 reviled	 by	 his
comrades	before	being	executed.	Mercy	had	been	unknown	to	Timur.
Babur	understood	the	need	for	ruthlessness.	Just	three	nights	ago,	on	a	surprise	tour	of	inspection,	he
had	found	five	men	asleep	on	picket	duty	and	had	ordered	an	example	to	be	made	of	them.	Their	left	ears
had	been	sliced	off	and	the	men	paraded	before	the	rest	of	Babur’s	force,	bleeding	and	with	the	severed
ears	on	a	string	round	their	necks.	But	if	he	was	to	succeed,	as	Timur	had	done,	in	forging	and	holding	an
empire,	he	would	have	to	find	even	greater	reserves	of	toughness	within	himself,	an	even	greater	ability	to
sacrifice	others	to	his	ambition	without	the	appearance	of	a	second	thought.
‘Majesty.’	 One	 of	 Babur’s	 scouts,	 well	 muffled	 in	 sheepskin	 against	 the	 cold,	 rode	 up	 to	 him.	 ‘The
sultan	has	fled	from	his	capital	ten	miles	ahead	of	us	to	a	fortress	on	banks	of	the	Bajaur	river	in	the	hill
country	twenty	miles	east	of	here.	He	has	taken	all	his	army,	two	thousand	soldiers,	with	him.’
‘You’re	sure	of	this	–	it	isn’t	a	trap?’
‘We	saw	him	ride	out	with	his	troops,	accompanied	by	many	camp-followers	and	citizens,	and	tracked
him	all	the	way.’
‘Tell	me	about	the	fortress.’	Babur	leaned	forward	in	his	saddle,	green	eyes	glinting	above	his	facecloth.
‘It’s	a	large	rectangular	mud-brick	structure,	two	storeys	high,	on	the	brink	of	a	river	gorge	.	.	.	Let	me
show	you.’
The	 scout	 dismounted,	 cleared	 a	 patch	 of	 earth	 and,	 with	 the	 tip	 of	 his	 dagger,	 marked	 out	 a	 square
tower	 with	 a	 river	 running	 through	 the	 gorge	 beneath	 its	 north	 wall.	 ‘See,	 Majesty.	 Rising	 scrubland
surrounds	it	on	three	sides.	This	single	gateway	in	the	southern	wall	is	the	only	way	in	–	or	out	.	.	.’
Baburi	and	Babur	exchanged	a	glance.	It	couldn’t	be	better.	The	sultan	thought	himself	in	a	stronghold.
In	fact,	he	was	in	a	trap.

Four	days	later,	Babur	drew	on	his	leather	gauntlets	in	his	scarlet	command	tent	in	his	camp	on	one	of	the
few	 stretches	 of	 flat	 land	 not	 far	 from	 the	 fortress.	 As	 he	 had	 expected,	 the	 sultan	 had	 ignored	 his
invitation	the	previous	evening	to	surrender	and	find	mercy.	Now	he	would	face	the	consequences.	Under
cover	 of	 the	 night	 men	 and	 oxen	 had	 dragged	 the	 four	 guns	 into	 position	 four	 hundred	 yards	 from	 the
gateway	to	the	fortress.	As	quietly	as	they	could,	Ali-Quli’s	men	had	dug	mounds	of	earth	on	which	to	rest
the	guns,	then	concealed	them	with	brushwood	until	the	moment	for	action	came.
And	 that	 moment	 was	 fast	 approaching.	 Each	 of	 Babur’s	 commanders	 had	 had	 his	 orders.	 The	 main
force	 was	 to	 advance	 openly	 on	 the	 fortress’s	 southern	 side	 and	 immediately	 launch	 a	 frontal	 assault.
Meanwhile,	 the	 matchlock	 men	 would	 follow	 them,	 ready	 to	 pick	 off	 defenders	 on	 the	 battlements.
Finally,	when	he	judged	the	time	was	right,	Babur	would	reveal	his	cannon.
Under	a	steely	grey	sky,	Babur	gave	the	signal	for	the	attack	to	begin.	From	a	new	vantage-point	on	the

edge	of	a	copse	three	hundred	yards	below	the	western	corner	of	the	fortress,	where	he	and	Baburi	sat
side	 by	 side	 on	 their	 horses,	 he	 watched	 his	 mounted	 archers	 charge	 up	 the	 stony	 slope	 to	 the	 fortress,
loosing	arrows	as	they	rode.	Dismounting,	they	began	to	hoist	the	broad	wooden	ladders	they	had	dragged
with	them	up	against	the	fortress	walls,	to	the	left	of	the	gateway.	While	they	worked,	Ali-Quli	and	his
matchlock	men	fired	at	any	defender	rash	enough	to	expose	himself	on	the	battlements	above.
Two	 Bajauris	 fell	 immediately.	 Even	 from	 where	 he	 was,	 Babur	 sensed	 the	 defenders’	 consternation
and	 dismay.	 More	 fell.	 As	 the	 Bajauris	 realised	 that	 the	 red-hot	 balls	 could	 penetrate	 even	 shields	 and
chain-mail,	they	began	vanishing	from	the	battlements.
Babur’s	men	were	already	swarming	up	the	rough	ladders	two	abreast.	Keeping	themselves	pressed	as
close	to	the	walls	and	ladders	as	possible,	they	held	their	round	shields	high	to	protect	themselves	against
any	missiles	from	above.	Ali-Quli	had	already	signalled	the	matchlock	men	to	hold	fire	for	fear	of	hitting
their	 own	 side.	 Baba	 Yasaval,	 a	 courageous	 warrior	 from	 near	 Herat,	 was	 the	 first	 to	 reach	 the
battlements	and,	fighting	his	way	to	the	gatehouse,	at	once	got	to	work	with	his	men,	trying	to	winch	up	the
black	metal	grille	blocking	the	main	gateway.	But	now	that	the	muskets	had	fallen	silent,	the	defenders	had
regained	 their	 courage.	 Babur	 could	 see	 them	 running	 back	 on	 to	 the	 battlements,	 striking	 at	 Baba
Yasaval’s	 outnumbered	 men	 with	 spiked	 maces	 and	 battleaxes,	 forcing	 them	 to	 fall	 back	 from	 the
gatehouse.
Babur	 exchanged	 a	 brief	 glance	 with	 Baburi	 who,	 understanding	 exactly	 what	 was	 in	 his	 mind,	 rode
swiftly	 to	 the	 cannon	 and	 their	 teams,	 concealed	 further	 down	 the	 slope.	 Babur	 watched	 as	 the	 gunners
dragged	the	brushwood	from	around	the	weapons	and	adjusted	the	angle	of	elevation	of	each	barrel.
Next,	they	rammed	in	the	bags	of	gunpowder	and	the	stone	shot,	inserted	their	spiked	awls	into	each
touch-hole	 and	 quickly	 sprinkled	 a	 little	 more	 gunpowder	 around.	 Finally,	 four	 more	 men	 advanced	 to
light	the	charges	–	Babur	could	just	see	the	glowing	tips	of	the	lengths	of	oil-soaked	cord.	Baburi	looked
across	at	him	and,	seeing	him	circle	his	sword	above	his	head,	gave	the	order	to	fire.	All	of	a	sudden,
above	the	ordinary	noise	of	battle,	booming,	cracking	sounds	never	heard	before	in	Bajaur	tore	the	air.
The	first	cannon	ball	smashed	into	the	lower	storey	of	the	agreed	target,	the	fortress’s	twenty-foot-high
south-eastern	wall	to	the	right	of	the	gateway.	It	struck	about	ten	feet	above	the	ground,	spraying	chunks	of
brick	and	dust	in	all	directions.	The	second	ball	hit	just	below	as	did	the	third	and	fourth.	When	the	dust
and	smoke	cleared,	a	small	part	of	the	wall	had	collapsed	and	there	was	a	large	fissure	in	a	neighbouring
section.	A	detachment	of	Babur’s	men,	held	in	reserve	till	now,	were	already	scrambling	over	the	piles	of
rubble	into	the	fortress.
Stunned	defenders	were	fleeing,	some	letting	themselves	down	from	the	battlements	on	ropes,	slipping
and	 falling	 in	 their	 haste	 to	 get	 away	 before	 the	 unknown	 weapon	 that	 had	 destroyed	 part	 of	 the	 walls
roared	again.
While	Babur’s	archers	provided	covering	fire,	the	matchlock	men	moved	closer,	set	up	their	forks	and
fired	 at	 the	 fugitives.	 Babur	 saw	 two	 Bajauris	 tumble	 over,	 one	 in	 complete	 silence	 with	 a	 musketball
hole	 in	 his	 forehead,	 the	 other	 –	 a	 yellow-turbaned	 giant	 –	 screaming	 and	 clutching	 at	 his	 chest	 with
twitching	fingers	that	dripped	blood.	But	so	many	were	running,	stumbling	and	falling	down	the	eastward
slope	beneath	the	fortress	and	away	from	Babur’s	men	that	it	was	impossible	for	the	matchlock	men	to
deal	with	them	all.
‘Ride	them	down!’	Babur	ordered	a	troop	of	his	guard.	Then,	sword	in	hand,	he	galloped	up	the	incline
towards	the	main	gate	where	his	men	had	now	succeeded	in	retaking	the	gatehouse	and	raising	the	grille.
Baburi	joined	him	just	as	he	reached	it	and	they	rode	in	together.
‘Majesty.’	Baba	Yasaval,	his	face	shiny	with	sweat	from	his	efforts	and	blood	running	from	a	jagged	cut
above	his	left	ear,	greeted	Babur	as	he	emerged	into	the	courtyard.	‘The	sultan	is	dead	–	he	threw	himself

from	the	battlements	into	the	gorge.	We	have	taken	many	prisoners.	What	are	your	orders?’
‘Timur	opened	the	locks	of	terror	and	overturned	the	heights	of	mountains	.	.	.’	Those	words	–	cruel,
perhaps,	but	very	clear	–	resonated	in	Babur’s	head.	‘Execute	the	royal	council.	They	had	the	opportunity
to	submit	but	rejected	it.	Round	up	the	rest	–	women	and	children	too	–	to	be	sent	to	Kabul	to	work	as
slaves	for	our	people.’
‘Well?	What	do	you	think?	How	did	we	do?’	Baburi	asked,	as	they	inspected	the	conquered	fortress
and	the	damage	inflicted	by	the	cannon.
Babur	struggled	to	put	his	feelings	into	words.	Because	of	his	new	weapons	the	fortress	had	fallen	in
hours,	 not	 days,	 weeks	 or	 months.	 The	 possibilities	 seemed	 limitless.	 He	 gripped	 Baburi’s	 shoulder.
‘Today	we	fought	in	a	way	my	ancestors	never	knew,	that	would	have	amazed	them	.	.	.’
‘So	why	don’t	you	look	more	cheerful?’
‘Too	 often	 I’ve	 let	 myself	 be	 seduced	 by	 grand	 prospects	 that	 did	 not	 materialise.	 Haven’t	 you	 often
said	so	yourself?	I	don’t	want	to	rush	into	an	attack	against	Hindustan	until	I’m	sure	we’re	ready.’
‘But	today	was	a	beginning,	wasn’t	it?’

The	weeks	that	followed	provided	further	chances	for	Babur	to	test	both	weapons	and	tactics.	Leaving	a
conquered	 and	 subdued	 Bajaur,	 he	 took	 his	 men	 south-eastwards	 into	 the	 wild,	 mountainous	 country
bordering	 Hindustan.	 Again,	 none	 of	 his	 opponents	 had	 any	 response	 to	 the	 crash	 of	 his	 cannon	 or	 the
crack	of	his	muskets.
Indeed,	on	learning	of	Babur’s	approach	nervous	chieftains	fell	over	themselves	to	send	gifts	of	sheep,
grain,	 horses,	 even	 women,	 accompanied	 by	 grovelling	 messages.	 Their	 eagerness	 to	 placate	 him	 and
preserve	 from	 destruction	 their	 villages	 and	 mud	 fortresses	 perched	 on	 hilltops	 provoked	 a	 wry
amusement	in	Babur.	Some	even	presented	themselves	before	him	with	grass	in	their	mouths	–	the	gesture
of	submission	Babur	had	seen	among	other	wild	tribes	in	his	youth.
But	his	interest	in	subduing	petty	chiefs	was	waning.	At	night,	when	he	tried	to	sleep,	different	images
filled	his	mind.	A	conqueror	–	‘eyes	like	candles	without	the	brilliance’	–	surveyed	the	great	river,	the
Indus,	that	lay	between	him	and	his	objective.	Timur	had	had	no	difficulty	is	overcoming	men.	Neither	had
he	let	any	physical	barrier	stand	in	his	way	–	no	mountain	or	river	had	stopped	him.	Babur	must	be	the
same.	Fifteen	years	ago,	in	blistering	summer	heat,	he	and	Baburi	had	gazed	on	the	Indus.	Waking	with	a
start	he	felt	a	fierce	desire	to	do	so	again	that	he	could	not	later	explain	–	not	to	Baburi	or	even	to	himself
.	.	.	But	it	persisted	and	strengthened.
Putting	aside	thoughts	of	further	campaigning,	Babur	turned	his	column	eastward	until,	on	a	chill	March
morning,	 a	 broad,	 swift-flowing	 river	 finally	 came	 in	 sight.	 Without	 waiting	 for	 any	 of	 his	 men,	 he
galloped	ahead	over	cold,	hard	earth.	Reaching	the	bank,	he	jumped	from	his	horse,	ripped	off	his	clothes
and	dived	into	the	snow-fed	waters	that	had	flowed	all	the	way	from	the	distant	mountains	of	Tibet.
The	water	was	so	cold	that	he	gasped	and	swallowed	a	freezing	mouthful	that	seemed	to	constrict	his
throat	with	ice.	The	strong	current	was	already	sweeping	him	away	and	cries	of	alarm	were	coming	from
his	men	on	the	bank.	Taking	another	deep	breath	–	but	this	time	keeping	his	mouth	well	above	the	water	–
he	struck	out	with	powerful	strokes,	defying	the	elemental	force	that	wanted	to	carry	him	off.	With	elation
he	 realised	 he	 was	 not	 only	 holding	 his	 position	 but	 making	 headway.	 He	 was	 winning.	 There	 was	 a
splash	beside	him	and	Baburi’s	head	pushed	up	out	of	the	water	beside	him.
‘You	idiot,	what	are	you	doing?’	Baburi’s	face	was	almost	blue.	‘And	why	are	you	laughing?’

‘Swim	with	me	to	the	other	side	and	I’ll	tell	you.’
Together	 they	 forced	 themselves	 through	 the	 eddies	 and	 currents	 until	 they	 reached	 the	 far	 bank	 and,
grabbing	 handfuls	 of	 coarse,	 sage-green	 grass,	 hauled	 themselves	 out.	 Babur	 flung	 himself	 on	 to	 the
ground,	still	chuckling	though	he	was	shuddering	and	his	chilled	skin	was	puckering	with	goose-pimples.
‘So	what’s	this	all	about?’	Baburi	looked	down	at	him,	shaking	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes	and	slapping	his
sides	to	keep	warm.
‘Last	night	I	was	unable	to	sleep.	The	thought	of	the	Indus	so	near	made	my	blood	roar	in	my	ears	like
the	waters	of	the	river	itself.	I	made	a	vow	that	if	God	grants	me	victory	in	Hindustan,	I’ll	swim	every
river	in	my	new	empire.’
‘You	didn’t	have	to	start	so	soon	.	.	.	you’re	still	a	long	way	from	conquering	anything.’
Babur	sat	up.	‘I	had	to	do	it.	How	could	I	look	at	the	Indus	and	not	cross	it	.	.	.	?	Though	we	must	return
to	Kabul	it	won’t	be	long	till	we’re	back.	And	when	I	return,	this	earth	will	know	I	have	already	claimed
it.	It	will	welcome	me	.	.	.’
‘And	now	I	suppose	we	have	to	swim	back?’
‘Of	course.’

In	the	hour	before	dawn,	eight	months	after	his	swim	in	the	freezing	Indus,	Babur	left	Maham’s	chamber
where,	for	one	last	time,	he	had	lost	himself	in	the	silken	folds	of	her	body,	and	her	 long,	 sandalwoodscented	hair,	and	returned	to	be	alone	in	his	private	apartments.	He	listened	as	the	war	drums	boomed	out
their	sombre	rhythm	across	the	meadows	beneath	the	citadel	of	Kabul.	Going	on	to	the	balcony,	he	looked
out	 into	 the	 soft	 half-light,	 pricked	 by	 the	 glow	 of	 thousands	 of	 campfires.	 Yesterday,	 on	 this	 same
balcony,	with	Baburi	close	behind	him,	he	had	announced	his	grand	design	to	his	people.
‘From	the	time	Timur	invaded	Hindustan	it	has	been	the	rightful	property	of	his	descendants.	As	chief
among	them	I	will	ride	tomorrow	to	claim	what	is	mine	from	those	who	have	usurped	my	birthright.	Four
months	 ago	 I	 sent	 a	 hawk	 to	 the	 self-proclaimed	 ruler	 of	 much	 of	 Hindustan	 –	 Sultan	 Ibrahim	 Lodi	 of
Delhi	–	as	a	gift.	I	told	him	if	he	would	acknowledge	me	as	his	overlord	I	would	give	him	lands	to	govern
as	 my	 vassal.	 He	 sent	 the	 hawk	 back	 –	 without	 its	 head.	 Now	 he	 will	 lose	 his	 throne	 for	 insulting	 the
House	of	Timur	and	the	ruler	of	Kabul.’
Babur’s	people	had	roared	out	their	approval	of	his	martial	tone	even	if	Sultan	Ibrahim	was	just	a	name
to	them	and	they	knew	nothing	of	his	palaces	and	fortresses	in	Delhi	and	Agra,	his	great	treasuries	and
vast	 armies	 or	 the	 confederation	 of	 rulers	 –	 some	 Muslim	 like	 himself,	 others	 infidels	 –	 who	 were	 his
vassals.	Babur	had	smiled	inwardly	at	their	unthinking	acceptance	of	his	words.	True,	he	had	a	claim	to
Hindustan	but	his	greater	birthright	was	to	Samarkand.	The	memory	of	it	still	moved	him	but	he	knew	he
would	never	rule	there	again.
‘Majesty,	your	sister	wishes	to	speak	to	you.’	An	attendant	interrupted	Babur’s	thoughts.
‘Of	course.	Does	she	wish	me	to	go	to	her?’
‘No,	Majesty,	she	is	here.’
Khanzada	stepped	out	on	to	the	balcony.	As	soon	as	she	and	Babur	were	alone	she	lowered	her	veil.
The	 light	 falling	 on	 her	 face	 from	 a	 torch	 in	 a	 bracket	 on	 the	 wall	 softened	 her	 angular	 features	 and
smoothed	 away	 the	 lines.	 Babur	 saw	 again	 the	 girl	 who	 had	 solemnly	 brought	 their	 father’s	 sword,
Alamgir,	to	him	in	the	fortress	of	Akhsi	the	night	he’d	claimed	the	throne	of	Ferghana.
‘I	know	that	later	you	will	return	to	the	women’s	quarters	to	bid	your	wives	and	myself	goodbye,	but	I

wanted	 a	 moment	 with	 you	 alone.	 You	 and	 I	 are	 the	 only	 ones	 who	 remain	 from	 the	 happy	 days	 of	 our
childhood	in	Ferghana	when	life	seemed	so	secure,	so	full	of	promise.	We	have	experienced	much	since
then,	both	great	highs	and	lows	.	.	.’	She	paused.	‘Our	lives	might	have	been	easier	and	less	eventful	but
fate	 made	 them	 otherwise.	 Now	 you	 go	 on	 this	 great	 expedition	 of	 yours	 into	 Hindustan,	 which	 will
decide	the	place	of	our	family	in	history.	I	pray	it	may	bring	you	everything	you	and	I	desire,	just	as	our
father,	mother	and	grandmother	would	have	done.	Victory	and	conquest	will	give	a	point	to	what	we	have
lived	through	.	.	.	but	take	care,	my	little	brother.’	Khanzada’s	raisin	eyes	–	so	like	their	grandmother’s	but
darker	–	shone	with	tears.
‘I	will,	just	as	when	you	scolded	me	to	be	careful	after	I	fell	from	my	first	pony	when	I	was	trying	to
turn	too	tightly.’	Babur	put	his	arm	round	her.	‘Whatever	happens,	you	know	that	I’m	following	my	destiny
and	trying	to	live	up	to	my	birth.	The	signs	are	favourable.	Hasn’t	the	court	astrologer	predicted	that	if	I
launch	my	expedition	now,	in	late	November,	while	the	sun	is	in	Sagittarius,	I	will	be	victorious?’
For	a	brief	moment,	Khanzada	held	his	face	in	her	hands	and	kissed	his	forehead.	‘Goodbye,	brother,
till	we	meet	again.’
‘I	will	send	for	you	when	victory	is	ours.’
Then	she	was	gone,	hastening	back	to	the	women’s	quarters	where	he	knew	that,	in	the	months	ahead	–
whatever	 her	 own	 anxieties	 –	 she	 would	 be	 the	 strong	 hub,	 the	 comforter	 rather	 than	 the	 comforted.
Humayun	would	accompany	him	on	the	campaign	but	he	had	appointed	Kamran	as	regent	in	Kabul.	Even
though	he	would	have	the	wise	guidance	in	public	of	Baisanghar	and	Kasim	who	would	both	also	remain,
Khanzada’s	 astute	 advice	 would	 be	 the	 best	 guarantee	 of	 Kabul’s	 safety	 and	 good	 governance	 in	 his
absence.	 He	 knew	 also	 that	 she	 would	 prevent	 too	 many	 jealousies	 arising	 among	 his	 wives,	 listening,
conciliating	and	consoling,	just	as	Esan	Dawlat	had	done.
Out	 of	 the	 darkness	 came	 the	 sound	 of	 a	 trumpet,	 a	 reminder	 that	 in	 the	 meadows	 below	 the	 citadel,
more	 than	 ten	 thousand	 horsemen	 were	 stirring.	 Soon	 they	 would	 be	 checking	 their	 weapons	 and
equipment	and	saddling	their	horses.	The	standard-bearers	would	be	unfurling	the	banners	that	Babur	had
decided	to	stripe	with	yellow	and	green	–	the	colours	of	his	homeland,	Ferghana,	and	of	Timur’s	capital,
Samarkand	–	and	emblazon	with	the	three	circles	that	Timur	had	painted	on	his	banners,	to	represent	the
perfect	conjunction	of	the	planets	at	his	birth.
The	 gunners	 and	 matchlock	 men,	 their	 skills	 honed	 by	 rigorous,	 relentless	 training,	 would	 also	 be
preparing.	The	cannons,	muskets,	gunpowder	and	shot	were	already	loaded	on	to	the	carts.	So	were	the
huge	amounts	of	equipment	needed	to	set	up	camp	–	the	heavy	hide	tents,	their	supporting	poles	and	the
great	cooking	pots	needed	to	feed	so	many	mouths.
As	soon	as	the	sky	began	to	pale,	the	teams	of	oxen	would	be	yoked.	The	long	lines	of	pack-beasts	–
double-humped	camels,	donkeys,	ponies	–	would	be	loaded	with	their	burdens	of	grain,	cured	meats	and
other	 stores.	 The	 merchants	 who	 would	 follow	 Babur’s	 army	 to	 set	 up	 the	 camp	 market	 would	 also	 be
preparing	 their	 baggage	 and	 animal	 trains	 –	 a	 long,	 successful	 campaign	 offered	 the	 prospect	 of	 huge
profits.	With	them	would	come	the	usual	mass	of	camp-followers	–	labourers,	scavengers,	water-bearers,
women	with	children	at	the	breast,	anxious	to	be	near	their	men,	other	women	hoping	to	survive	by	selling
their	 bodies,	 the	 acrobats,	 dancers	 and	 musicians	 who	 knew	 soldiers	 would	 pay	 well	 for	 a	 bit	 of
entertainment	to	distract	them	from	thoughts	of	war.	A	whole	city	was	on	the	move.
A	few	hours	later,	just	before	midday,	with	the	winter	sun	shedding	its	silvery	light	over	the	landscape,
Babur	rode	out	from	the	citadel	of	Kabul,	Timur’s	gold	ring	on	his	finger	and	Alamgir	as	his	waist,	to	a
glorious	cacophony	of	trumpets.	As	he	passed	the	high	walls	of	the	city	a	knot	tightened	in	his	stomach	–
apprehension,	anticipation,	excitement?	It	was	all	of	those	things	and	he	had	known	them	many	times.
But	this	time	it	was	different.	He	felt	an	awesome	solemnity.	Truly,	fortune	was	extending	her	hand	.	.	.

if	only	he	could	grasp	it,	all	that	had	gone	before	–	his	fight	for	his	throne	in	Ferghana,	his	attempts	to
overcome	the	Uzbeks	and	hold	Samarkand,	his	rule	over	Kabul	–	would	prove	simply	stepping-stones	to	a
greater	destiny	for	himself	and	his	dynasty	.	.	.

‘The	astrologer	was	right.	Fortune	is	favouring	us,’	Babur	told	Humayun	and	Baburi,	lounging	beside	him
on	cushions	beneath	leather	awnings	on	a	large	raft	being	navigated	by	oarsmen	down	the	swift-flowing
Kabul	 river.	 Around	 them,	 on	 a	 string	 of	 larger	 craft,	 were	 the	 cannon	 and	 much	 of	 the	 heavy	 baggage,
while	the	bulk	of	the	army	made	its	way	along	the	banks.
‘You	did	well,	Humayun,	to	raise	so	many	troops	among	the	northern	nomads.’	Ten	days	after	Babur
and	the	main	force	had	left	Kabul,	his	son	had	joined	them	with	more	than	two	thousand	soldiers	from	the
wilds	of	Badakhshan.
‘It	wasn’t	difficult,	Father	–	not	with	all	the	gold	we	had	to	offer.’
‘They’re	 good	 fighters,	 the	 Badakhshanis,	 though	 they’re	 quick	 to	 quarrel	 among	 themselves	 or	 with
others,’	said	Baburi,	drawing	his	blue	cloak	more	tightly	round	him	against	the	chill	air	blowing	off	the
water.
‘The	pace	they’re	having	to	keep	up	should	sap	their	surplus	energy,’	Babur	said.
The	 sight	 of	 the	 rushing	 jade	 waters	 bearing	 him	 downriver	 towards	 Hindustan	 pushed	 thoughts	 of
troublesome	tribesmen	from	his	mind	and	filled	him	with	euphoria.	Soon	he’d	call	for	some	bhang	mixed
with	opium.	Once	it	had	provided	an	escape	from	reality	but	now	it	enhanced	the	happiness	of	the	present
and	heightened	his	optimism	for	the	future.	Each	time	he	took	it,	even	the	austere,	stony	grey	landscape
they	were	passing	through	seemed	drenched	in	a	golden	light	and	every	feature	–	every	tree,	every	flower,
even	 the	 flocks	 of	 fat,	 shaggy	 sheep	 –	 was	 endowed	 with	 a	 fresh,	 startling	 beauty.	 When	 he	 closed	 his
eyes,	other	images	crowded	his	mind	–	of	his	men	galloping	joyously	across	battlefields	strewn	with	the
bodies	 of	 his	 enemies,	 their	 horses’	 hoofs	 scarcely	 touching	 the	 ground,	 of	 himself	 wearing	 a	 golden
crown	glittering	with	rubies	and	sitting	on	a	golden	throne	beneath	an	infinite	sky	.	.	.
‘What	are	you	smiling	about?’	asked	Baburi.
‘I’m	thinking	about	what’s	ahead.	Where	we’ll	be	in	a	year	from	now.’
‘In	Delhi,	I	hope	.	.	.’
‘And	where	d’you	think	we’ll	be,	Humayun?’
‘I	don’t	know,	Father	.	.	.	but,	God	willing,	we’ll	have	slain	your	enemies	and	won	an	empire.’
Babur	 and	 Baburi	 exchanged	 an	 amused	 glance	 at	 his	 naivety	 but	 then	 their	 expressions	 sobered.
Grandiose	words,	perhaps,	for	one	so	young	but	weren’t	their	sentiments	exactly	the	same?

‘Majesty,	the	scouts	have	returned.	They	have	found	a	suitable	place	to	cross	the	Indus.’
Babur’s	heart	leaped.	This	was	the	news	he	had	been	waiting	for	ever	since,	leaving	the	Kabul	river
behind,	 he	 had	 marched	 his	 army	 safely	 beyond	 the	 bare,	 pebbly	 defiles	 of	 the	 Khyber	 Pass	 and	 southeastwards	towards	the	Indus.	He	and	Baburi	had	just	set	out	to	go	hunting	–	villagers	had	reported	two
rhinoceroses	browsing	beneath	the	interlaced	branches	of	an	oak	wood	five	miles	beyond	his	camp	–	but
that	would	have	to	wait.
‘Come!’	 Babur	 called	 to	 Baburi,	 then	 galloped	 back	 to	 where	 the	 scouts	 were	 waiting	 outside	 his

scarlet	campaign	tent.
‘Majesty,	 there	 is	 a	 place	 a	 day’s	 march	 from	 here	 where,	 if	 we	 build	 rafts,	 we	 can	 float	 everything
across,’	the	commander	of	the	scouts	reported.
‘What	about	the	currents?’
‘The	crossing	place	is	just	below	a	sharp	bend	in	the	river	that	reduces	the	strength	of	the	current	at	that
point	–	we	experimented,	floating	three	pack-mules	across,	and	it	went	well.	Also,	there	are	enough	trees
to	cut	down	for	the	rafts	and	there	was	no	sign	of	any	habitation	along	that	stretch	of	the	bank.	We	should
be	able	to	cross	unmolested.’
Next	day,	Babur	and	Baburi	looked	for	the	third	time	in	their	lives	on	the	Indus.
‘You’re	not	going	to	go	swimming	again,	are	you?’	Baburi	asked.	‘Because	if	you	are,	I’m	not	coming
in	this	time	.	.	.’
‘No	more	swimming	until	I	have	my	empire.	We’re	in	luck	–	the	level	of	the	river	is	lower	than	when
we	last	saw	it.’	Babur	stooped,	picked	up	a	stick	and	flung	it	in.	‘The	scouts	were	right.	That	bend	in	the
river	does	reduce	the	force	of	the	current	–	the	stick	is	floating	away	quite	slowly	.	.	.’
‘You	sound	almost	disappointed.	Do	you	want	some	symbolic	epic	struggle	to	get	across?’
‘I	 don’t	 want	 it	 but	 I	 expected	 it.	 We’ll	 camp	 here,	 and	 as	 soon	 as	 our	 carpenters	 have	 built	 enough
rafts,	we	go	over.’
Constructing	the	rafts	–	felling	trees,	hewing	wood	into	rough	planks,	securing	them	together	with	rope
and	 covering	 the	 surface	 with	 hide	 cut	 from	 spare	 tents	 –	 took	 three	 days.	 On	 the	 fourth,	 they	 crossed.
Although	 a	 thin	 veil	 of	 cold	 rain	 was	 falling,	 turning	 the	 banks	 to	 oozing	 mud	 and	 making	 the	 rafts
slippery,	 getting	 so	 many	 men	 and	 beasts	 over	 the	 Indus	 took	 only	 from	 first	 light	 until	 midday.	 The
advance	 guard	 went	 first,	 then	 the	 horses,	 camels,	 bullocks,	 and	 the	 all-important	 cannon	 and	 muskets.
Next	came	the	soldiers,	merchants	and	the	camp	baggage,	leaving	the	camp-followers	to	make	their	own
crossing.	The	only	losses	were	three	camels	that,	badly	laden	and	not	properly	tethered,	had	capsized	a
small	raft	and	drowned.
As	soon	as	he	arrived	on	the	other	side,	Babur	ordered	a	small	tent	to	be	erected.	Entering	it	alone	he
fastened	the	flaps.	Then,	he	knelt,	leaned	forward	and	pressed	his	lips	to	the	bare	earth.	‘I	claimed	you
once	 and	 I	 do	 so	 again,’	 he	 whispered.	 ‘I	 claim	 you	 for	 the	 House	 of	 Timur,	 for	 myself	 and	 my
descendants.’	 Taking	 a	 small	 agate	 locket	 that	 hung	 on	 a	 chain	 round	 his	 neck,	 he	 opened	 it	 and	 very
carefully,	with	the	tip	of	his	dagger,	dug	a	few	grains	of	earth	and	tipped	them	inside.	Then	closing	the
locket	again	he	tucked	it	back	inside	his	tunic	where	it	rested	against	his	heart.

In	the	February	sunset,	the	waters	of	the	Sutlej	river	beside	Babur’s	camp	glowed	amber.	It	was	the	final
great	waterway	before	the	north-west	plains	of	Hindustan	and	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	great	city	of	Delhi.	They
had	done	well	to	get	there	so	quickly,	Babur	thought.	After	crossing	the	Indus,	the	winter	rain	had	stayed
with	 them	 for	 a	 while.	 The	 soft	 ground	 had	 slowed	 their	 pace	 as	 the	 horses	 and	 pack-animals	 had
struggled,	especially	the	beasts	drawing	the	cannon.	But	at	last	the	rain	had	ceased	and	they	had	advanced
steadily,	crossing	the	network	of	tributaries	of	the	Indus.
So	far	they	had	faced	only	wild,	lawless	tribes.	One	–	the	Gujars	–	had	descended	on	Babur’s	men	as
they	negotiated	a	narrow	pass	but	his	rearguard	had	easily	repulsed	them.	The	piles	of	Gujari	heads	left	in
neat	 stacks	 had	 been	 an	 effective	 deterrent	 and	 no	 others	 had	 dared	 attack.	 Once	 across	 the	 Sutlej,	 it
would	 be	 a	 different	 matter.	 They	 would	 be	 entering	 the	 lands	 of	 powerful	 chiefs	 who	 were	 vassals	 of

Sultan	Ibrahim.	A	few	days	ago,	Babur	had	sent	messengers	over	the	river	with	an	ultimatum	to	one	of
these	 –	 Firoz	 Khan	 –	 whose	 lands	 lay	 directly	 between	 him	 and	 Delhi:	 ‘Your	 lands	 once	 belonged	 to
Timur	and	I	claim	them	as	my	birthright.	Surrender	them	and	pledge	me	your	allegiance.	Then	you	may
continue	to	rule	as	my	vassal	and	there	will	be	no	pillage	or	plunder.’
In	 reply,	 the	 chieftain	 had	 sent	 back	 the	 gift	 of	 a	 fine,	 mail-clad	 horse,	 the	 colour	 of	 pale	 almond
blossom,	 with	 a	 message:	 ‘Your	 claim	 is	 artificial.	 My	 allegiance	 is	 to	 Sultan	 Ibrahim	 in	 Delhi,	 the
rightful	ruler	of	Hindustan.	After	your	long	journey	into	lands	that	do	not	belong	to	you,	your	own	horse
will	be	tired	and	thin.	May	this	beast	carry	you	swiftly	back	to	Kabul.’	Babur	had	laughed	at	the	man’s
arrogance	and	given	the	horse	to	Baburi.
Firoz	Khan	would	regret	his	impudence,	Babur	thought,	as	he	made	his	way	back	to	his	campaign	tent.
Humayun	had	begged	to	be	allowed	to	take	a	small	advance	force	of	his	Badakhshani	nomads	over	the
Sutlej	to	spy	out	the	terrain	in	preparation	for	the	advance	of	the	main	force	on	Firoz	Khan’s	stronghold
and	Babur	had	agreed.	Soon,	God	willing,	he	would	rendezvous	with	his	son	after	crossing	the	river	and
show	 Firoz	 Khan	 weapons	 he	 had	 never	 seen	 .	 .	 .	 In	 his	 tent,	 he	 paced	 up	 and	 down,	 restless	 and
conscious	 that	 the	 success	 of	 his	 long-pent-up	 ambition	 would	 soon	 be	 decided.	 Towards	 midnight,	 he
ordered	his	attendants	to	bring	him	some	opium	mixed	with	wine.	It	would	help	him	relax,	maybe	even
sleep	–	something	he	was	finding	it	harder	and	harder	to	do.
The	heady	concoction	did	its	work	and	Babur’s	mind	began	to	wander	down	pleasant	paths	.	.	.	he’d	no
idea	how	long	had	passed	when	suddenly	the	crack	of	thunder	intruded	into	his	dreams.	The	day	had	been
hot	and	humid.	Perhaps	the	rains	would	bring	freshness	to	the	air.
Soon	heavy	rain	was	pounding	the	roof	of	his	tent.	After	a	while,	droplets	started	to	ooze	through	the
seams.	He	began	to	count	them	–	one,	two,	three,	splash	.	.	.	one,	two,	three,	splash	.	.	.	His	eyelids	were
drooping	when	suddenly	he	heard	Baburi’s	voice	and	felt	a	strong	hand	shaking	him	to	full	consciousness.
‘The	river’s	burst	its	banks!	The	camp’s	being	washed	away.’
‘What?’	Dazed	with	the	opium,	he	found	it	hard	to	take	in	Baburi’s	words.
‘We’re	being	flooded.	The	river’s	turning	into	a	lake.	We’ve	got	to	move.’
Grabbing	 Alamgir	 in	 its	 scabbard	 and	 chaining	 it	 to	 his	 belt,	 Babur	 rushed	 outside	 and	 could	 hardly
believe	 what	 he	 saw:	 the	 whole	 camp	 was	 already	 beneath	 a	 foot	 of	 muddy	 water.	 His	 commanders,
struggling	through	it	towards	his	tent	from	all	directions,	were	looking	to	him	for	orders.
His	poppy-induced	languor	vanished.	‘Abandon	the	tents	and	the	heavy	baggage.	Get	the	horses	and	the
men	to	higher	ground.’	Through	the	rain	–	falling	so	heavily	that	it	stung	–	he	could	just	make	out	the	low
hills	 to	 their	 rear.	 ‘Carry	 with	 you	 as	 many	 of	 the	 muskets	 and	 as	 much	 of	 the	 gunpowder	 as	 you	 can.
Leave	 the	 cannon	 –	 the	 water	 cannot	 move	 them.	 Untether	 the	 pack-animals.	 They	 must	 fend	 for
themselves,	as	must	all	in	the	camp	.	.	.	There	is	little	time.’
Babur	shouted	through	the	teeming	rain	to	his	attendants	to	bring	his	horse	and	Baburi’s.	Together	they
rode	through	the	rising	waters,	encouraging	men	to	save	what	they	could,	but	then	–	when	the	water	was
almost	up	to	stirrup	level	–	they	made	for	the	hills.	Their	frightened	horses,	half	swimming,	struggled	at
first.	Bending	low	over	their	necks,	Babur	and	Baburi	whispered	encouragement	into	their	ears.	Detritus
from	the	camp	floated	all	around	them	–	cooking	pots,	riding	boots,	drowned	chickens	and	sheep.	When
they	finally	reached	the	higher	ground,	Babur	found	many	of	his	horsemen	already	gathered	there.	Some
had	 managed	 to	 bring	 others	 to	 safety	 with	 them	 –	 women	 and	 children,	 sodden	 and	 miserable,	 were
among	those	sheltering	beneath	the	trees.
About	dawn,	the	rain	stopped	and	a	few	hours	later	the	floodwaters	were	receding.	Closing	his	eyes,
Babur	gave	thanks.	At	least	nearly	all	of	the	army	seemed	to	have	survived.	As	soon	as	the	waters	had
subsided	 they	 would	 return	 to	 the	 camp	 and	 retrieve	 everything	 they	 had	 abandoned	 –	 the	 cannon,	 their

chain-mail,	armour,	weapons,	tents	and	whatever	provisions	were	still	fit	to	eat.	Then	they	would	round
up	the	pack-beasts.	He	would	take	no	more	opium	till	Hindustan	was	his.
The	whine	of	a	mosquito	landing	on	the	back	of	his	sunburned	neck	distracted	Babur	and	he	slapped	it,
leaving	a	smear	of	dark-red	blood	–	his	own.	But	it	was	others’	blood	that	was	about	to	flow.	He	had	no
need	of	his	court	astrologer	to	tell	him	that.	First	Firoz	Khan’s,	and	then	anyone	else’s	who	opposed	him
on	the	road	to	Delhi.	Nobody	would	stand	in	his	way.

	
	
	

Chapter	22
Panipat
	

Babur’s	men	had	erected	his	large,	scarlet	command	tent	at	the	very	centre	of	the	camp	they	had	pitched
two	days	previously	at	the	small	village	of	Panipat	on	the	plains	north-west	of	Delhi.	The	tent	gave	little
respite	from	the	intense	dry	heat	of	an	April	afternoon	to	Babur	and	his	military	council	gathered	around
him.	When	the	side	flaps	were	down	the	atmosphere	soon	grew	stifling.	When	they	were	pulled	back	and
secured	with	leather	thongs,	the	omnipresent	wind	blew	in	gritty	dust	that	clogged	noses	and	stung	eyes.
The	windbreaks	of	thick	brown	cloth	erected	some	yards	from	the	tent	had	improved	things	only	a	little.
Babur	sat	on	his	gilded	throne	with	his	back	to	the	breeze,	drinking	a	sherbet	made	from	local	limes
mixed	 with	 water	 and	 some	 of	 the	 last	 of	 the	 carefully	 preserved	 ice	 they	 had	 brought	 down	 from	 the
mountains.	Baburi,	squatting	on	his	haunches	by	Babur’s	left	side,	was	doing	likewise,	lowering	the	thin
yellow	cotton	cloth	he	had	tied	over	the	lower	part	of	his	face	to	protect	against	the	dust	each	time	he	took
a	sip.
Just	a	month	after	his	eighteenth	birthday	Humayun	was	seated	on	a	stool	to	his	father’s	right.	He	was
wearing	a	deep	green	tunic	woven	from	the	thinnest	cotton	loosely	belted	over	baggy	trousers	of	the	same
material.	 Like	 several	 other	 commanders,	 he	 was	 being	 cooled	 by	 a	 great	 peacock	 feather	 fan	 wielded
dextrously	above	his	head	by	servants	stripped	to	the	waist	but	still	perspiring	copiously	with	the	effort.
‘What	do	our	scouts	tell	us	about	the	movement	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	troops,	Baburi?’
‘They’re	still	moving	towards	us	but	taking	their	time	about	it.	They	break	camp	only	every	other	day
and	even	then	they	only	travel	five	or	six	miles	before	making	camp	again,	partly	because	of	the	size	of
their	 baggage	 train	 but	 also,	 I	 think,	 because	 they’ve	 no	 great	 appetite	 for	 an	 early	 engagement.	 They’d
rather	leave	us	to	eat	up	our	supplies	or	–	in	our	impatience	–	make	an	unwise	attack	of	our	own.’
‘No	chance	of	that,	I	hope.	We	must	tempt	them	to	attack	us	so	that	we	can	make	the	most	of	our	cannon
and	muskets,	firing	from	defensive	positions	and	thus	reducing	the	effect	of	their	greater	numbers.	While
we’re	on	the	subject,	what	are	the	latest	estimates	of	their	strength?’	Babur	put	down	his	sherbet.
‘About	a	hundred	thousand	–	two-thirds	cavalry,	the	rest	foot-soldiers.	The	latter	probably	with	plenty
of	eagerness	for	plunder	but	little	for	battle.	And	then,	of	course,	there	are	the	war	elephants.	Our	spies
say	there	are	around	a	thousand,	nearly	all	in	good	condition,	well	trained	and	armoured.	They’re	a	real
worry.	 Even	 if	 we	 sit	 on	 the	 defensive	 we’ll	 need	 to	 blunt	 their	 charge	 before	 they	 get	 into	 our	 lines.
Otherwise,	 if	 they	 do	 get	 in	 amongst	 us,	 we’ll	 find	 it	 difficult	 to	 keep	 our	 men	 disciplined.	 Most	 have
scarcely	seen	an	elephant,	never	mind	fought	one—’
‘The	cannon	will	help,’	interrupted	Humayun.
‘Yes,	but	we’ll	need	to	protect	them	too	if	they’re	to	be	reloaded	and	get	off	enough	shots	to	make	a
difference.	We	musn’t	let	them	be	overrun	after	firing	just	a	couple	of	rounds.’
‘	We	could	position	them	at	the	centre	of	our	formation,	just	as	this	tent	is	at	the	centre	of	the	camp	for
protection,’	Humayun	said.
‘But	they’ll	need	a	clear	field	of	fire	.	.	.’	Baburi	went	on.
‘Let	me	speak.’	Babur	motioned	both	Humayun	and	Baburi	to	be	silent.	‘Baburi,	do	you	remember	what

that	old	woman	–	Rehana	–	told	us	all	those	years	ago,	when	we	were	not	much	older	than	Humayun	is
now,	about	Timur’s	strategy	when	he	took	Delhi?	Last	night	I	was	thinking	about	our	battle	plan	and	what
my	great	ancestor	might	have	done	when	I	remembered	Rehana	–	and	that	I	had	had	the	good	sense	to	have
her	account	transcribed	and	still	had	it	in	the	chest	where	I	keep	important	royal	papers	and	my	diary	.	.	.
‘When	I	read	it	I	found	it	provided	the	main	elements	of	a	battle	plan	against	the	elephants.	Timur	had
trenches	dug	and	used	the	earth	to	build	ramparts	in	front	of	his	lines.	Then	he	ordered	tethered	bullocks
to	be	roped	together	as	a	further	line	of	protection.	I	thought	we,	too,	should	dig	trenches	and	throw	up
earth	barricades	–	but	instead	of	tying	bullocks	together,	we	should	link	our	baggage	wagons	by	knotting
their	traces	to	each	other,	leaving	gaps	at	intervals	through	which	our	cannon	–	placed	as	you	suggested,
Humayun,	 at	 our	 centre	 –	 can	 fire	 and	 our	 cavalry	 make	 sorties	 when	 necessary.	 We	 could	 station	 the
musketeers	and	some	of	our	best	mounted	archers	to	protect	the	gaps	between	the	wagons	with	crossfire.’
Nods	of	agreement	followed,	but	Baburi	asked,	‘That	begs	the	question	of	how	you’ll	make	sure	they
actually	attack	us,	rather	than	try	to	force	us	into	retreat	by	cutting	off	our	supplies.’
‘Once	 we’ve	 prepared	 our	 positions,	 if	 they	 don’t	 attack	 after	 a	 few	 days	 we’ll	 attempt	 to	 provoke
them.	We’ll	make	a	flanking	movement	apparently	aimed	at	their	camp	and	its	treasure	or	–	better	still	–
launch	a	limited	attack	and	then	feign	retreat.	We’ll	make	them	think	they’ve	bested	us	and	that	an	easy
victory	will	be	theirs	if	only	they	follow	through	.	.	.’

Over	the	next	few	days,	Babur’s	soldiers	worked	from	the	cool	hours	of	dawn	through	the	hottest	part	of
the	day,	when	the	horizon	shimmered	in	a	heat	haze,	and	on	to	dusk,	digging	the	hard,	dry	ground	to	scrape
out	trenches	and	throw	up	earth	barricades.	It	was	slow,	exhausting	work.	Many	collapsed	from	the	effect
of	 the	 sun,	 all	 too	 many	 falling	 into	 a	 delirium	 –	 eyes	 rolling,	 tongues	 lolling	 –	 from	 which	 they	 were
never	to	rise.
To	hearten	the	men,	Babur	and	Humayun	each	took	a	spade	and	laboured	with	them,	filling	buckets	with
earth	and	carrying	them	two	at	a	time	suspended	from	wooden	shoulder	yokes	to	the	top	of	the	ramparts.
After	 three	 days	 the	 barricades	 were	 of	 sufficient	 height.	 Behind	 them,	 the	 wagons	 had	 been	 linked
together	and	bullocks	had	drawn	the	cannon	into	carefully	measured	positions	in	the	gaps	between	them.
Supplies	 of	 the	 heavy	 stone	 cannon	 balls	 had	 been	 piled	 next	 to	 each	 and	 the	 Turkish	 gunners	 were
drilling	 their	 men	 in	 the	 loading	 process.	 The	 noise	 of	 the	 armourers’	 hammers	 and	 the	 clamour	 of
numerous	voices	–	excited	and	apprehensive	–	echoed	around	the	camp.
As	Babur	rode	by	on	his	tour	of	inspection,	Baburi	at	his	side,	the	voices	hushed	for	a	moment	and	the
soldiers	stood	still,	bowing	their	heads.	Baburi	leaned	across	to	Babur.	‘The	latest	reports	still	show	the
forces	of	Delhi	disinclined	to	attack	although	they	are	now	only	three	miles	off.’
‘But	at	least	–	if	our	informers	are	right	–	there’s	dissent	and	desertion	in	their	camp,	with	complaints
that	Ibrahim	is	miserly	in	paying	his	troops	and	even	more	parsimonious	with	promises	of	future	reward.
A	divided	house	is	easier	to	conquer	than	a	united	one	and	–	equally	important	–	easier	to	provoke	to	rash
action.’
‘True.’
‘Ibrahim	 must	 know	 that	 waiting	 will	 sap	 morale	 and	 leave	 scope	 for	 more	 complaining	 and
quarrelling,	and	perhaps	more	desertions.’
‘But	even	we	can’t	hold	our	men	in	check	for	too	long,	however	good	our	discipline	is	and	however
often	we	explain	the	reasons	for	delay.’

‘Let’s	plan	a	sortie	to	draw	him	on	to	us.’
‘When?’
‘Tomorrow.	Call	the	military	council.’

About	an	hour	before	dusk	the	next	day	Babur,	on	his	black	horse,	watched	as	four	thousand	of	his	best
men	 –	 half	 of	 them	 archers	 –	 mounted	 and	 then,	 amid	 the	 shouts	 of	 their	 officers	 and	 the	 neighing	 and
snorting	 of	 their	 horses,	 who	 seemed	 to	 have	 absorbed	 some	 of	 their	 riders’	 excitement	 and	 nervous
tension,	 formed	 themselves	 into	 ranks	 and	 then	 squadrons.	 As	 soon	 as	 they	 had	 done	 so,	 Babur	 led	 his
force	 out	 of	 his	 encampment,	 through	 the	 barricades	 and	 trenches,	 and	 started	 to	 circle	 to	 the	 west	 of
Sultan	 Ibrahim’s	 position.	 He	 had	 decided	 to	 attack	 from	 out	 of	 the	 setting	 sun	 so	 that,	 with	 the	 glare
combining	with	the	dust	from	the	horses’	hoofs,	his	opponents	would	be	unable	to	tell	the	number	of	their
assailants.	When	they	had	reached	a	point	about	a	mile	west	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	outposts,	Babur	halted	his
men	and	turned	to	Baburi.	‘Have	you	chosen	the	men	to	snatch	some	prisoners?’
‘Yes.	I’ll	lead	them	myself.’
‘Then	let’s	go.’
‘Keep	safe	for	the	final	battle.’
With	a	wave	of	his	arm,	Babur	gave	the	order	to	charge.	Digging	his	heels	into	the	glossy	black	flanks
of	his	horse	he	rapidly	outdistanced	his	men.	Soon	he	was	a	hundred	yards	ahead.	He	realised	he	felt	no
fear,	 only	 exhilaration	 at	 the	 speed	 of	 his	 charge,	 and	 a	 joy	 that	 his	 strength	 remained	 that	 of	 his	 youth.
Then	he	remembered	Baburi’s	parting	words:	this	was	not	the	final	battle	on	which	his	destiny	depended,
just	a	raid	to	bring	it	on.	He	must	curb	his	impatience	and	exuberance	and	allow	the	riders	following	to
take	closer	order	round	him.	As	he	did	so,	he	saw	that,	in	front	of	them,	Ibrahim’s	men	were	running	for
their	weapons.	Some	were	already	mounted	and	the	first	arrows	were	flying	towards	his	own	troops.
Moments	 later,	 Babur’s	 black	 horse	 had	 carried	 him	 in	 among	 his	 enemies	 and	 he	 was	 instinctively
twisting	and	slashing	to	left	and	right	with	Alamgir.	To	him,	the	fight	became	a	series	of	images	blurring
together:	a	Hindustani	with	a	blue	turban	falling	beneath	his	horse’s	hoofs,	blood	streaming	from	a	slash
across	his	face	that	had	exposed	his	teeth;	a	brown	tent	suddenly	appearing	in	front	of	him	so	that	he	had
to	 drag	 his	 horse’s	 head	 round	 to	 avoid	 becoming	 entangled	 with	 it;	 an	 axe	 whizzing	 through	 the	 air	 to
embed	itself	in	the	neck	of	the	horse	beside	him,	followed	by	the	thud	as	its	slow	fall	pitched	its	rider	to
the	ground.
Suddenly	Babur	saw	open	space	before	him.	He	was	through	the	first	line	–	he	and	his	men	must	wheel
round	rather	than	penetrate	deeper	and	risk	being	swallowed	up	by	his	opponents.	Reining	in	his	excited
horse	with	difficulty,	he	gave	the	prearranged	signal	to	come	round	and	gallop	back	through	the	swirling
dust	that	was	now	blanketing	Ibrahim’s	disordered	troops.
Babur	 knew	 this	 turn	 was	 the	 moment	 of	 greatest	 danger,	 when	 his	 galloping	 men	 could	 collide	 with
each	 other	 and	 become	 an	 easy	 target	 for	 Sultan	 Ibrahim’s	 archers.	 However,	 his	 cavalry	 were	 well
trained	 and	 –	 although	 he	 saw	 one	 or	 two	 men	 take	 crashing	 falls	 as	 they	 tried	 to	 turn	 their	 mounts	 too
tightly	–	most	accomplished	it	successfully	and	Babur	was	soon	back	through	the	dust	and	confusion	of	the
enemy	line	and	riding	for	his	own	camp,	pursued	by	a	hissing	shower	of	arrows.	Just	as	he	had	ordered
before	 the	 attack	 began,	 his	 men	 immediately	 broke	 formation	 and	 scattered,	 some	 throwing	 away	 their
shields	as	if	in	panic.
Darkness	was	falling	swiftly,	as	it	always	did	on	the	plains,	by	the	time	Babur	dismounted	within	the

protection	of	his	earth	ramparts.	He	did	not	have	long	to	wait	before	Baburi	appeared	from	the	gathering
gloom.	He	had	a	white	cloth	tied	tightly	round	the	knuckle	of	his	left	hand	and,	from	the	scarlet	stain,	had
clearly	suffered	a	sword	slash.	However,	he	was	smiling	as	he	approached	Babur.
‘You’ve	got	the	prisoners?’
‘A	fine	selection	–	not	just	water-carriers	but	some	cavalrymen	including	a	captain	who	put	up	a	great
fight	before	we	could	subdue	him.’
‘He’ll	 be	 our	 messenger,	 then.	 Bring	 him	 to	 my	 tent	 in	 five	 minutes.	 Make	 sure	 he	 and	 the	 rest	 stay
blindfolded.	We	don’t	want	them	reporting	on	our	dispositions.’
Five	minutes	later,	Baburi	led	his	prisoner	into	Babur’s	presence.	He	was	a	tall,	muscular	man	with
dark	skin.	As	he	approached,	Babur	noticed	he	had	a	bushy	moustache	of	the	type	beloved	by	so	many
Hindustanis	and	reflected	that	few	from	his	homeland	–	himself	included	–	had	the	luxuriant	hair	required
to	produce	one.
‘Take	off	that	blindfold.	What	is	your	name?’
‘Asif	Iqbal.’
‘Well,	 Asif	 Iqbal,	 you	 are	 as	 fortunate	 as	 I	 am	 told	 you	 are	 brave.	 You’re	 to	 be	 released	 to	 bear	 a
message	from	me	to	Sultan	Ibrahim.’
The	man	showed	no	emotion,	merely	bowing	his	head	in	acknowledgement	that	he	understood.
‘You	 will	 tell	 him	 that	 although	 we	 were	 repulsed	 in	 our	 attack	 today	 and	 have	 suffered	 many
casualties,	we	defy	him.	We	call	him	coward	because	even	though	he	has	overwhelming	numbers	he	dare
not	attack	us.	Ask	him	if	it	is	because	his	commanders	will	not	obey	him	–	you	can	tell	him	several	have
sent	 messages	 to	 me	 offering	 their	 allegiance	 for	 reward.	 Or	 is	 it	 because	 he	 knows	 that	 God	 will	 not
support	him,	a	ruler	whose	army	numbers	far	more	infidels	than	it	does	followers	of	the	true	faith?	Tell
him,	“Attack,	or	for	ever	bear	the	name	of	coward.”’
After	the	black	blindfold	had	been	re-tied	tightly	round	the	captain’s	eyes	and	he	had	been	led	out	to	be
released	 near	 Ibrahim’s	 camp,	 Babur	 turned	 to	 Baburi.	 ‘Let’s	 hope	 that	 that	 and	 the	 impression	 of
weakness	we	gave	by	our	pretended	flight	tonight	are	enough	to	encourage	Ibrahim	to	the	attack.’
‘They	should	be.	No	man	likes	to	be	called	coward.	Ibrahim	knows	that	there	is	discontent	within	his
army	 and	 the	 suggestion	 that	 some	 nobles	 are	 in	 secret	 contact	 with	 us	 should	 make	 him	 want	 to	 attack
before	his	army	begins	to	disintegrate	and	he	loses	some	of	his	advantage	in	numbers.’
‘I	agree.	Arrange	for	our	men	to	be	called	to	arms	an	hour	before	dawn.	Any	attack	from	Ibrahim	will
surely	come	before	the	heat	of	the	day.’
Baburi	was	turning	to	go	when	suddenly	he	embraced	Babur.	‘Tomorrow	will	be	a	fateful	day	for	us
both.	I	feel	it.’
‘Sleep	well.	Fate	will	favour	the	rested,	I’m	sure.’
Without	reply,	Baburi	walked	from	the	tent	and	was	swallowed	up	by	the	darkness	beyond.

Ever	 since	 dawn	 there	 had	 been	 great	 activity	 in	 Sultan	 Ibrahim’s	 camp	 –	 shouting,	 the	 trumpeting	 of
elephants	 and	 the	 neighing	 of	 horses.	 A	 few	 minutes	 ago	 Ibrahim’s	 drummers	 had	 begun	 to	 beat	 out	 an
urgent	rhythm.
He	really	is	going	to	attack,	Babur	thought.	If	so,	this	would	be	the	most	decisive	day	of	Babur’s	life
but	 he	 had	 done	 all	 he	 could	 to	 ensure	 victory.	 Scarcely	 sleeping,	 he	 had	 gone	 over	 his	 battle	 plan
throughout	the	night,	looking	for	flaws	or	weaknesses	without	finding	any.	There	was	no	more	he	could	do

.	.	.
He	called	Baburi	and	Humayun	to	him	for	their	final	orders.	Humayun	was	to	command	the	right	wing
and	 Baburi	 the	 left.	 Once	 battle	 was	 well	 joined	 and	 Ibrahim’s	 men	 preoccupied	 with	 the	 attack	 on
Babur’s	barricades	of	earth	and	wagons,	they	were	to	start	an	encircling	movement.	When,	God	willing,
victory	was	theirs,	they	were	to	pursue	any	fleeing	enemies	relentlessly	to	prevent	them	regrouping.
When	his	son	and	his	comrade	had	departed	to	their	positions,	Babur	rode	round	the	troops	that	would
defend	the	barricades	and	addressed	them	in	small	groups.	His	message	was	usually	the	same:	‘Yours	is
the	position	of	glory.	You	will	decide	the	fate	of	the	battle.	Be	strong.	Trust	in	yourself	and	our	cause.	You
have	seen	the	strength	of	our	new	weapons,	the	cannon	and	the	muskets.	You	must	defend	them	well	from
the	enemy	to	allow	them	to	wreak	their	havoc.’
Once	 he	 singled	 out	 a	 bunch	 of	 nervous	 young	 cavalrymen,	 clustered	 together	 round	 their	 mounts,
checking	 and	 rechecking	 their	 equipment.	 ‘I	 remember	 how	 I	 felt	 in	 my	 first	 battle.	 The	 waiting	 is	 the
worst.	I	know	you	will	fight	well	when	the	time	comes.	Concentrate	on	the	enemy	in	front	of	you,	trusting
in	your	comrades	to	protect	you	from	the	side.’
In	another	part	of	the	line	he	dismounted	at	one	of	the	earth	barricades	and	tested	the	bow-string	of	a
leathery-skinned	veteran	with	a	pink	scar	high	on	his	bald	head	who	was	at	his	post	behind	the	rampart.
‘How	far	can	you	send	an	arrow	with	this	bow?’
‘Five	hundred	yards,	Majesty.’
‘Well,	I	don’t	need	to	remind	a	seasoned	soldier	like	you	to	wait	until	our	enemies	are	four	hundred	and
ninety-nine	yards	away	before	you	fire.	But	perhaps	I	do	need	to	say	that	you’ll	serve	me	best	by	aiming	at
the	riders	sitting	behind	the	ears	of	those	elephants	I	hear	preparing	over	there.	Once	they	are	dead,	the
beasts	are	directionless	and	will	trample	their	own	men.’
As	 he	 rode	 back	 to	 his	 place	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 barricades,	 Babur	 made	 his	 final	 stop	 before	 the
captain	of	his	Turkish	gunners,	Ali-Quli.	‘Thank	you	for	travelling	so	far	from	your	homeland	to	fight	with
me.	I	know	that	each	of	your	weapons	is	worth	fifty	of	our	opponents’	elephants,	however	daunting	they
may	seem.	Put	them	to	flight	and	I’ll	reward	you	well.’
Back	in	his	position	Babur	dismounted	and	knelt	for	a	moment	in	prayer.	As	he	finished,	images	of	his
father,	 his	 mother,	 his	 grandmother	 Esan	 Dawlat,	 Wazir	 Khan	 and	 Baisanghar	 came	 into	 his	 mind.	 Esan
Dawlat’s	expression	seemed	the	most	warlike	of	all.	Silently	he	promised,	I	will	do	you	all	honour	today
and	prove	I	am	worthy	of	you	and	the	blood	of	Timur	and	Genghis.
‘Majesty,	they’re	definitely	on	the	move.’
His	qorchi	broke	into	Babur’s	thoughts	and	he	stood	up,	calm	and	confident	in	his	destiny.	His	squire
fitted	on	his	steel	breastplate,	buckled	on	his	father’s	sword	and	handed	him	his	domed	helmet,	with	its
green	and	yellow	plume,	together	with	a	long	leather-sheathed	dagger	that	Babur	stuck	into	the	top	of	one
of	his	brown	leather	riding	boots.
He	could	see	that	Ibrahim’s	forces	were	advancing	swiftly	now.	As	he’d	expected,	the	war	elephants
were	 in	 the	 lead.	 Most	 seemed	 twice	 a	 man’s	 height	 and	 the	 morning	 sun	 reflected	 off	 the	 shiny,
overlapping	 steel	 plates	 of	 their	 armour.	 Curved	 scimitars	 –	 six	 feet	 in	 length	 –	 were	 strapped	 to	 their
scarlet-painted	tusks.	The	drivers	were	urging	their	elephants	to	move	more	quickly	with	blows	from	the
large	wooden	sticks	they	held	in	their	hands.	Already	archers	were	firing	from	the	howdahs	–	the	small
castles	positioned	on	the	elephants’	backs	–	but	the	arrows	were	falling	short:	they	were	still	out	of	range.
Babur	hoped	his	own	men	would	heed	his	command	to	hold	their	fire	until	they	could	reach	their	target.
But	first	let	Ibrahim’s	men	and	beasts	feel	the	effect	of	his	new	weapon	from	the	west:	the	cannon.	Babur
waved	Alamgir	twice	above	his	head	–	the	prearranged	signal	to	Ali-Quli	to	open	fire.	He	saw	the	first
artilleryman	bend	to	put	a	lighted	taper	to	the	powder	in	the	firing	hole.	Then	there	was	a	flash,	a	roar,	and

white	smoke	emerged	from	the	barrel	as	the	cannon	ball	was	propelled	towards	the	enemy.	Other	flashes
followed	from	the	rest	of	the	cannon	and	smoke	began	to	drift	across	the	barricades.
Through	 it	 Babur	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 leading	 elephants	 fall,	 dislodging	 its	 howdah	 and	 sending	 the
occupants	sprawling	to	the	ground.	Then	the	wounded	beast	staggered	upright	again,	turned,	trunk	raised
in	what	looked	like	a	trumpet	of	pain,	and	crossed	the	path	of	its	neighbour,	bringing	it	down,	too,	before
collapsing	again,	blood	pouring	from	the	stump	of	one	of	its	front	legs.	As	it	lay,	thrashing	its	head	back
and	forth	in	agony,	the	scimitar	on	its	tusk	cut	into	an	elephant	following,	which	–	frightened	and	in	pain	–
bolted.	But	although	such	incidents	were	being	repeated	the	length	of	the	advancing	line,	Sultan	Ibrahim’s
forces	were	still	pressing	on.
Suddenly,	Babur	heard	the	crackling	discharge	of	muskets.	More	of	his	enemies	fell.	Then	his	archers
started	to	fire,	some	riding	out	from	behind	the	barricades	to	get	closer	to	their	targets	–	the	drivers	sitting
behind	the	elephants’	white-painted	ears.	Ibrahim’s	front	line	wavered.	More	elephants	trumpeted	in	fright
and	turned	to	the	rear,	bringing	a	crashing	halt	to	those	behind,	provoking	yet	more	to	panic	and	trample
their	own	men	beneath	their	great	feet	as	they	fled.
Babur	yelled	for	more	mounted	archers	to	ride	out	and	fire	into	the	swiftly	disintegrating	enemy	ranks.
As	 he	 did	 so,	 he	 felt,	 rather	 than	 heard,	 a	 loud	 explosion	 near	 him	 and	 pieces	 of	 hot	 metal	 showered
around	 him	 while	 something	 warm	 and	 soft	 stuck	 to	 his	 face.	 Dazed	 and	 partly	 deafened,	 he	 could	 not
think	what	had	happened.	Then	he	realised	one	of	his	cannon	had	exploded	and	Ali-Quli	had	been	blown
apart.	 Raising	 his	 hand	 to	 his	 cheek	 he	 discovered	 it	 was	 a	 piece	 of	 his	 master-gunner’s	 flesh	 that	 had
struck	him.	Ali-Quli	would	now	receive	his	reward	in	Paradise,	not	on	earth,	but	his	work	had	been	well
done.	More	and	more	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	troops	were	fleeing	when	they	could,	in	particular	the	infantry,
many	of	whom	were	barefoot,	wearing	only	a	loincloth	and	with	just	a	spear	to	defend	themselves.
Pulling	himself	together,	Babur	waved	his	sword	in	a	gesture	for	his	best	cavalry	to	follow,	kicked	his
heels	into	the	flanks	of	his	black	horse	and	led	them	at	a	gallop	through	the	smoke	and	dust	the	half-mile
into	the	heaving,	shouting	mass	of	fleeing,	frightened	men.
Some	 of	 Ibrahim’s	 troops	 were	 made	 of	 more	 determined	 stuff	 and	 were	 putting	 up	 a	 brave	 fight,
grouping	themselves	tightly	into	defensive	formations.	Babur	made	for	a	small	hillock	on	which	one	such
group	 of	 cavalry	 –	 about	 a	 hundred	 men	 all	 wearing	 gold	 turbans	 –	 were	 succeeding	 in	 driving	 off	 all
attacks.
‘It’s	 Ibrahim’s	 bodyguard,’	 one	 of	 his	 men	 yelled.	 Babur	 rode	 directly	 towards	 the	 tall	 officer	 who
appeared	to	be	commanding	them.	Swerving	to	the	left	at	the	last	minute	to	pass	him,	Babur	slashed	with
his	sword	in	his	right	hand	but	the	officer	raised	his	shield	in	time	to	deflect	the	blow	and,	with	his	other
hand,	 cut	 deep	 into	 the	 rump	 of	 Babur’s	 black	 stallion	 with	 his	 sword.	 The	 animal	 reared	 in	 pain	 and
Babur	was	thrown	to	the	earth.	As	he	struggled	to	regain	his	feet,	he	saw	the	officer	urge	his	white	horse
towards	him,	bent	on	finishing	him	off.
Babur	stood	his	ground	until	the	last	minute,	then	jumped	to	the	side	slashing	wildly	with	Alamgir	as	he
did	so.	The	sword	skimmed	along	the	left	side	of	the	white	horse’s	neck	and	then	penetrated	deep	into	the
thigh	 of	 its	 rider.	 However,	 he	 was	 clearly	 an	 expert	 horseman	 and	 despite	 his	 wound	 stayed	 in	 the
saddle,	controlling	his	horse	and	wheeling	it	–	bright	red	staining	its	white	coat	–	ready	to	attack	Babur
once	more.
This	time,	Babur	ducked	low	as	the	officer	swung	his	sword	with	the	aim	of	decapitating	him,	and	cut
with	Alamgir	at	the	back	of	the	white	horse’s	foreleg.	He	hit	his	target	and	the	horse	fell,	trapping	its	rider
beneath	it	and	causing	his	sword	to	fly	from	his	grasp.	As	the	officer	struggled	to	reach	for	it,	Babur	put
his	foot	on	his	wrist	and	Alamgir	to	his	throat.	‘Surrender.	You	deserve	to	live	for	your	bravery.’	As	he
spoke,	more	of	his	men	assembled	around	him,	having	at	last	killed	or	put	to	flight	the	rest	of	the	gold-

turbaned	warriors.	Seeing	further	resistance	was	useless,	the	officer	lay	still.	‘I	will	give	you	my	word
not	to	renew	the	fight,’	he	said.
‘Help	him	to	his	feet	.	.	.	What	was	it	you	and	your	fellows	were	struggling	so	bravely	to	protect?’
‘The	body	of	Sultan	Ibrahim.	It	lies	over	there.	He	was	mortally	wounded	by	the	sting	of	one	of	your
new	weapons.	They	have	rendered	bravery	useless.’
‘No	weapon	is	more	powerful	than	he	who	aims	it.’
All	the	while	they	had	been	speaking,	the	officer’s	white	horse	had	been	neighing	and	thrashing	in	pain,
blood	running	from	the	cut	on	its	neck	and	unable	to	support	itself	on	the	foreleg	where	Babur	had	slashed
its	 tendon.	 Now,	 bleeding	 from	 the	 mouth	 and	 speaking	 with	 increasing	 difficulty	 –	 probably	 from	 the
effect	of	being	crushed	by	his	mount	–	the	officer	said,	‘Allow	me	to	have	my	sword	to	put	my	stallion	to
rest.	I	have	ridden	him	in	many	battles.	He	will	face	death	more	calmly	if	I	am	the	one	to	inflict	it.’
Babur	signed	to	one	of	his	men	to	return	the	sword.	The	officer	–	scarcely	able	to	walk	from	the	wound
in	his	own	thigh	as	well	as	his	shortage	of	breath	–	moved	over	to	the	horse.	Taking	its	gold	leather	bridle
he	stroked	its	nose,	cradled	its	head	and	whispered	into	its	ear.	His	words	seemed	to	calm	it.	Then	he
quickly	 drew	 his	 sharp	 sword	 across	 its	 throat	 severing	 its	 windpipe	 and	 artery	 and	 more	 red	 blood
spurted.	The	horse	collapsed	instantly	and	within	moments	was	still,	its	blood	welling	up	into	the	dust.
However,	the	officer	was	not	finished.	He	thrust	the	sword	into	his	own	abdomen.	‘I	can	no	more	survive
crippled	than	can	my	horse.’
‘May	your	soul	rest	in	peace.’
‘I	pray	so,	but	remember	that	to	subdue	Hindustan	you’ll	need	to	subdue	many	men	braver	than	I.’
As	 the	 last	 words	 bubbled	 scarcely	 audibly	 through	 the	 froth	 of	 blood	 in	 his	 throat,	 he	 too	 died,	 his
body	slumping	across	that	of	his	stallion	while	his	gold-turbaned	head	hit	the	bloodstained	earth.
‘Majesty,	the	battle	is	yours.’
The	words	of	his	qorchi	roused	Babur	from	contemplation	of	the	scene	before	him.	Looking	around,	he
realised	that	the	battlefield	was	falling	silent,	that	the	fighting	was	over	.	.	.	He	had	triumphed.	‘Praise
God.’	He	felt	an	enormous	sense	of	relief.	Then	at	the	thought	of	what	his	victory	meant,	he	punched	the
air	in	joy.	He	–	like	Timur	–	would	enter	Delhi	in	triumph	.	.	.
Dragging	his	mind	back	to	the	present,	Babur	addressed	the	riders	around	him.	‘We	have	done	well.	Let
us	 hope	 that	 Humayun	 and	 Baburi	 succeed	 in	 capturing	 or	 thoroughly	 dispersing	 Ibrahim’s	 retreating
forces.	 At	 least	 with	 him	 dead	 they	 will	 have	 no	 leader	 to	 rally	 round.	 Bury	 Ibrahim	 –	 and	 indeed	 this
brave	officer	–	with	due	ceremony.	I	will	return	to	our	camp	to	await	news	of	the	pursuit.’
His	victory	had	been	so	swift	that	it	was	not	yet	midday	when	Babur	turned	his	horse	and	rode	back
towards	his	camp,	past	the	bodies	of	elephants	lying	like	great	boulders	amid	the	dust,	mostly	surrounded
by	the	wreckage	of	their	howdahs	and	the	crumpled	bodies	of	the	soldiers	fallen	from	them.	In	the	heat,
his	own	men	had	already	begun	to	gather	up	their	wounded,	placing	them	on	rough	stretchers,	binding	their
wounds	and	offering	them	water	and	what	other	comfort	they	could.
In	his	red	tent	once	more,	Babur	paced	back	and	forth.	Where	were	Humayun	and	Baburi?	He	was	less
worried	about	his	friend	than	his	inexperienced	son.	Although	Humayun	had	fought	in	skirmishes	before,
and	performed	well,	this	was	his	first	command	at	a	big	battle	and	the	leadership	of	the	right	wing	in	the
pursuit	was	a	major	and	novel	responsibility	for	him.
Babur	distracted	himself	by	making	short	visits	to	the	wounded	and	to	reward	soldiers	reported	to	have
fought	 particularly	 bravely,	 as	 well	 as	 in	 hearing	 reports	 of	 the	 plunder	 captured	 from	 Ibrahim’s	 camp.
Already	it	seemed	he	had	a	vast	haul	of	jewels	and	gold	at	his	disposal.
Six	 hours	 had	 passed	 before	 a	 guard	 entered	 Babur’s	 tent	 to	 announce,	 ‘The	 pennants	 and	 flags	 of
Prince	Humayun’s	column	have	been	seen	approaching.’

He	 had	 barely	 finished	 speaking	 before	 a	 breathless	 Humayun	 entered,	 rushed	 to	 his	 father	 and
embraced	 him.	 ‘Our	 victory	 is	 complete.	 We	 are	 masters	 of	 Hindustan.	 We	 followed	 a	 large	 group	 of
Ibrahim’s	men	more	than	ten	miles	to	the	south-west	until	they	made	a	stand	in	a	mud	fortress	by	a	river.
After	an	hour’s	fight	we	forced	them	to	surrender.	A	little	further	to	the	west	we	found	a	group	of	nobles’
tents	 that	 were	 being	 defended	 by	 a	 few	 guards	 or	 servants	 against	 what	 looked	 more	 like	 bandits	 or
looters	than	soldiers	from	any	army.
‘When	we	had	killed	the	attackers,	a	beautiful	woman	of	about	my	mother’s	age	emerged	from	a	white
tent	with	cream	and	gold	awnings.	She	was	wrapped	in	one	of	those	garments	the	Hindustanis	call	saris.	It
was	a	fine	silk	and	had	many	pearls	and	jewels	sewn	on	to	it.	She	asked	who	was	in	command,	and	on
being	told	it	was	I,	and	that	I	was	your	son,	requested	to	be	brought	before	me.	She	told	me	she	was	the
mother	of	the	ruler	of	Gwalior,	a	wealthy	kingdom	to	the	south	of	Delhi.	She	had	heard	her	son	had	been
killed	fighting	courageously	for	Ibrahim.
‘Instead	 of	 fleeing	 when	 she	 learned	 the	 news	 she	 had	 determined	 to	 wait	 to	 receive	 his	 body	 and
perform	the	proper	funeral	ceremonies.	They’re	infidels	who	cremate	the	bodies	of	their	dead	on	pyres.
Then	a	fleeing	soldier	galloping	past	their	camp	had	yelled	that	our	forces	were	killing	the	prisoners,	so
many	of	her	men,	except	a	brave	few,	had	abandoned	her.	And	the	brigands	–	dacoits,	she	called	them	–
whom	we	defeated	had	seen	their	chance	of	plunder	and	had	attacked	the	camp.	She	had	feared	for	her	life
and	 her	 honour	 but,	 most	 of	 all,	 she	 had	 feared	 for	 her	 six-month-old	 grandson	 who,	 with	 his	 young
mother,	the	dead	ruler’s	favourite	wife,	was	still	in	the	tent.
‘I	 told	 her	 to	 fear	 no	 more,	 that	 we	 were	 a	 cultured,	 civilised	 people,	 not	 savages	 like	 the	 dacoits.
Tears	 of	 gratitude	 wetted	 her	 face	 and	 she	 gave	 me	 this,	 which	 I	 now	 give	 you	 as	 a	 token	 of	 our	 great
victory.’	As	he	spoke	Humayun	handed	Babur	a	soft	red	leather	pouch	secured	by	a	gold	leather	thong.
Babur	undid	the	tie	and	pulled	out	a	large	stone	that	glistened	and	sparkled	in	the	gloom	of	the	tent.	‘It’s	a
diamond,	Father,	from	the	mine	at	Golconda	a	thousand	miles	to	the	south	–	the	biggest	I’ve	ever	seen.
The	jeweller	of	the	royal	family	of	Gwalior	once	valued	it	as	worth	half	of	the	daily	expenditure	of	the
whole	world.	It	is	called	the	Koh-i-Nur,	the	Mountain	of	Light	.	.	.’
Babur	was	held	by	the	gem’s	perfect	purity	and	brilliance.	Light	radiated	from	it	as	if	from	a	star	–	the
Canopus,	he	thought,	smiling	at	his	fancy	.	.	.	Still,	the	jewel’s	intense	brightness	seemed	to	belong	to	the
heavens	rather	than	the	earth	whence	it	had	been	dug	.	.	.
‘Indeed,	my	son,	you	have	merited	your	name,	Fortunate.	Long	may	it	continue	until—’	Babur	broke	off
in	mid-sentence.	Through	the	open	entrance	of	the	tent	he	had	glimpsed	two	attendants	carrying	a	stretcher
covered	with	a	sheet	towards	him.	From	all	the	shouting	and	bustle,	it	was	clear	that	Baburi’s	column	had
now	also	returned.	Where	was	he?	Why	hadn’t	he	come	to	report	and	share	in	the	joy	of	conquest?	Then
Babur	saw	that	a	hand	wearing	a	richly	chased	golden	ruby	ring	was	trailing	in	the	dust	from	beneath	the
sheet.	He	had	given	that	ring	to	Baburi	many	years	ago	to	mark	the	success	of	one	of	their	campaigns.	As
the	 two	 handsome	 young	 men	 carrying	 the	 bier	 lowered	 it	 gently	 to	 the	 ground	 before	 Babur,	 he
recognised	them	as	Baburi’s	attendants.
Slowly	 Babur	 bent	 and,	 with	 a	 trembling	 hand,	 pulled	 back	 the	 bloodstained	 cloth	 and	 gazed	 at	 the
monstrously	mangled	body	of	his	brother-in-arms.
‘We	 came	 upon	 a	 large	 body	 of	 Ibrahim’s	 men	 retreating	 towards	 Delhi	 in	 good	 order	 with	 forty
elephants	in	their	vanguard	and	the	same	number	in	their	rear.	Our	master	Baburi	ordered	an	immediate
charge	and	we	routed	your	enemies,	who	fled	in	all	directions.	But	during	the	last	moments	of	the	fight,
our	master	was	knocked	down,	trampled	and	crushed	by	one	of	the	elephants,	wounded	and	enraged	by	a
spear	thrust	deep	into	its	mouth,’	said	one	of	the	attendants.
Only	Baburi’s	face	–	even	paler	than	in	life	–	was	untouched.	His	intense	indigo	eyes	still	stared	up	at

Babur	and	there	was	a	half-smile	on	his	face.	Babur	could	not	prevent	himself	weeping	as,	leaning	over
the	bier	once	more,	he	closed	Baburi’s	eyes	and	kissed	him	on	his	forehead.	‘Goodbye,	my	brother	.	.	.’

	
	
	

Chapter	23
The	First	Moghul
	

The	sun’s	metallic	glare	hurt	Babur’s	eyes.	Advancing	over	the	arid	landscape	where	even	the	scrubby
bushes	 were	 coated	 with	 dust,	 he	 was	 glad	 of	 the	 shade	 of	 the	 green	 and	 yellow	 brocade	 canopy
supported	on	golden	poles	by	the	four	riders	around	him.	A	strong	wind	was	whipping	up	the	dust	–	he
had	already	learned	that	his	new	subjects	called	it	andhi	and	that	it	meant	the	rains	were	not	far	off.
Immediately	 after	 Panipat,	 he	 had	 ordered	 Humayun	 and	 four	 of	 his	 commanders	 with	 their	 men	 to
leave	 behind	 their	 heavy	 baggage	 and	 ride	 hard	 and	 fast	 to	 Ibrahim’s	 capital	 at	 Agra	 –	 a	 hundred	 and
twenty	miles	south-east	of	Delhi	along	the	Jumna	river	–	to	seize	the	fort	and	the	imperial	treasuries	there
before	the	garrison	had	time	to	organise	their	defences.	Now,	three	days	later,	Babur	was	taking	the	bulk
of	 his	 victorious	 army	 south	 to	 Delhi.	 At	 the	 rear,	 almost	 obscured	 beneath	 a	 billowing	 cloud	 of	 dust,
were	ranks	of	plodding	war	elephants	–	still	streaked	in	red	paint	–	that	his	men	had	rounded	up	after	the
battle.
Babur	should	have	been	jubilant	but	grief	for	Baburi	was	blunting	his	triumph.	In	the	first	hours	after	he
had	learned	of	Baburi’s	death,	he	had	shut	himself	away	in	his	tent,	unwilling	to	see	anyone	or	to	address
the	many	tasks	and	decisions	that	awaited	him	as	the	new	ruler	of	Hindustan.	Baburi’s	death	wasn’t	just
the	loss	of	a	best	friend	–	it	felt	like	the	passing	of	his	previous	life.	He	would	never	–	could	never	–	have
a	friend	like	that	again	–	a	friend	who	had	shared	his	youth	and	his	fluctuating	fortunes.
When	 he’d	 first	 met	 Baburi	 he’d	 been	 not	 yet	 twenty,	 the	 ruler	 of	 a	 small	 part	 of	 Ferghana,	 more	 a
footloose	warlord	than	a	king.	Now	he	was	a	father	and	emperor	of	a	large	realm	who	must	always	be
conscious	of	his	dignity	and	keep	his	distance	in	his	dealings	with	others	of	whatever	rank.	From	now	on,
his	closest	companions	would	inevitably	be	his	sons.	Much	as	he	loved	them	it	would	not	be	the	same	as
with	 Baburi.	 The	 difference	 in	 age	 and	 experience	 between	 them,	 the	 respect,	 the	 filial	 obedience	 they
owed	 him	 would	 always	 lie	 between	 them,	 as	 would	 his	 overwhelming	 desire	 to	 protect	 them,	 and	 to
teach	them	how	to	live	and	rule.	They	could	not	challenge	him,	laugh	at	him	–	as	well	as	with	him	–	as
Baburi	had	done	.	.	.
So	many	memories,	so	many	thoughts	and	feelings,	kept	running	through	Babur’s	mind	–	the	first	time
he’d	 seen	 Baburi’s	 sharp-featured,	 streetwise	 face	 and	 intensely	 indigo	 eyes	 as	 he’d	 rushed	 to	 save	 a
child	from	beneath	the	hoofs	of	Babur’s	horse;	Baburi’s	first	tentative	efforts	to	ride;	the	freedom	of	their
youth;	 their	 wild,	 drunken	 nights	 together	 in	 the	 whorehouses	 of	 Ferghana;	 all	 those	 years	 of
companionship	and	humour,	of	huddling	together	for	warmth	as	cold	winds	buffeted	their	tent,	of	raids	and
battles,	some	victorious,	some	otherwise	.	.	.
So	many	of	those	events	had	played	out	against	the	backdrop	of	the	world	he	and	Baburi	had	belonged
to,	 a	 place	 of	 cold,	 tumbling,	 twisting	 rivers,	 of	 enfolding	 hills,	 sharp-sided	 valleys	 and	 endless	 plains
that	were	sweet	with	clover	in	the	summer	but	in	winter	froze	hard	as	iron.	A	place	of	rich	cities	with
domes	and	minarets	of	turquoise	and	green,	ancient	madrasas	 and	 libraries	 where	 the	 Timurid	 heritage
was	understood	and	revered.	Now,	without	his	friend,	Babur	was	in	a	new	land	that	had	no	understanding
of	him	and	that	he,	in	turn,	did	not	yet	fully	comprehend.	Except	that	he	already	knew	he	didn’t	like	the

climate.	Sweat	was	trickling	down	his	face	and	the	air	felt	almost	solid,	as	if	it	had	never	known	a	breath
of	wind.	Beneath	his	plumed	headdress,	his	head	throbbed.
At	least	they’d	not	encountered	any	hostility	as	they	advanced.	Sometimes	Babur	had	seen	small	groups
watching	 curiously	 from	 a	 distance	 as	 his	 long	 line	 of	 horsemen	 and	 endless	 baggage	 carts	 passed	 by.
Now,	shading	his	eyes,	he	could	see	a	jumble	of	low,	mud-built	thatched	houses	to	one	side	of	the	wide
track	they	were	following.	Golden	cakes	of	animal	dung	were	drying	in	the	sun.	Skinny,	pale-furred	dogs
were	lying	in	the	meagre	pools	of	shade	and	a	few	scrawny	hens	were	running	about.	Of	people	there	was
no	 sign,	 either	 outside	 the	 houses	 or	 in	 the	 surrounding	 fields	 where	 thin-legged	 white	 egrets	 pecked
insects	off	the	backs	of	water	buffalo	with	their	yellow	bills.
All	in	all,	it	looked	a	mean	little	settlement.	Babur	turned	away,	but	then	he	noticed	something	else	just
beyond	the	village,	a	large,	curiously	shaped	sandstone	edifice	within	a	low,	walled	compound.	Its	scale
seemed	 out	 of	 proportion	 with	 the	 village.	 As	 he	 drew	 nearer	 he	 saw	 that	 the	 front	 façade	 of	 the	 main
building	 was	 a	 carved	 mass	 of	 what	 looked	 like	 intertwined	 figures,	 arms	 and	 legs	 protruding
everywhere.	 Several	 times	 on	 the	 long	 road	 to	 Panipat	 he’d	 glimpsed	 similar	 buildings	 but	 had	 had
neither	the	time	nor	the	inclination	to	examine	them.
He	signalled	a	halt.	‘Find	out	what	this	place	is,’	he	ordered	his	qorchi.
Fifteen	minutes	later,	the	squire	returned	with	a	tiny	old	man,	desiccated	face	furrowed	as	a	walnut	and
eyes	filmy	with	age,	together	with	one	of	Babur’s	captains,	Junayd	Barlas.	As	a	youth,	Junayd	had	learned
Hindi	from	a	Hindustani	carpet	dealer	who	had	settled	in	Kabul.	Babur	had	appointed	him	his	interpreter
until	he	could	find	a	better	one.
‘This	man	says	it	is	a	Hindu	temple,	Majesty,’	Junayd	explained.	‘I	think	he	is	one	of	its	priests.’
‘I’d	 like	 to	 see	 it.’	 Babur	 dismounted	 and	 examined	 the	 priest	 more	 closely.	 The	 man	 was	 almost
entirely	naked	except	for	a	loincloth	which,	wound	around	his	think	flanks	and	passing	between	his	legs,
was	secured	to	a	string	around	his	waist.	Around	his	left	shoulder	and	passing	under	his	right	arm	was	a
long	loop	of	cotton	thread.	His	coarse	white	hair	and	beard	were	long	and	straggling	and	there	was	what
looked	like	a	smudge	of	ashes	on	his	forehead.	In	his	right	hand	he	carried	a	wooden	stick,	as	gnarled	as
himself.
Slowly	the	priest	led	the	way	into	the	compound.	The	main	building	was	indeed	like	nothing	Babur	had
ever	seen	before.	Its	front	was	a	seven-tiered	structure	perhaps	thirty	feet	wide	at	the	base,	which	tapered
into	a	squared-off	tower	at	the	top.	Carved	figures	of	humans	–	men	and	women	–	with	voluptuous	bodies
and	 staring,	 bulbous	 eyes,	 wearing	 clinging,	 seemingly	 semi-transparent	 garments,	 with	 jewels	 on	 their
foreheads	and	around	their	necks	and	arms,	covered	the	façade.	Interspersed	with	these	figures	–	some	of
whom	 seemed	 to	 be	 dancing	 and	 others	 about	 to	 copulate	 –	 were	 strange,	 fierce-looking,	 warlike
characters	–	demons,	perhaps,	or	gods.	Some	had	the	heads	of	animals	–	monkeys	and	elephants.
Babur	 stared.	 So	 much	 elemental	 life	 and	 vitality,	 but	 what	 did	 it	 mean?	 A	 doorway	 led	 into	 the
building.	 To	 one	 side	 a	 flight	 of	 narrow	 dark	 stairs	 ascended	 to	 the	 upper	 storeys.	 There	 was	 a	 strong
smell	he	didn’t	recognise,	a	scent	richer,	sweeter	and	far	more	pungent	than	sandalwood.
The	 priest	 glanced	 over	 his	 shoulder.	 Satisfied	 that	 Babur	 was	 still	 close	 behind,	 he	 walked	 on,	 his
staff	 tapping	 the	 dusty	 stone	 slabs	 on	 the	 ground.	 Babur	 followed	 him	 into	 the	 building’s	 square	 inner
courtyard	around	which	ran	a	covered	gallery.	The	walls	were	carved	with	scenes	from	what	he	supposed
must	 be	 some	 Hindu	 folktale	 or	 legend.	 Warriors,	 with	 the	 faces	 of	 monkeys,	 brandishing	 short	 swords
appeared	to	be	crossing	a	bridge	to	an	island	to	do	battle.
Richly	carved	sandstone	pillars	depicting	more	well-fleshed	bodies	–	some	with	four,	six	or	even	eight
arms	–	supported	the	gallery.	On	one	side	of	the	courtyard	was	a	large	white	stone	statue	of	a	kneeling
bull,	a	string	of	marigolds	round	its	muscular	neck	and	sticks	of	incense	burning	in	a	brass	pot	before	it.

Nearby,	 with	 lighted	 candles	 surrounding	 it,	 was	 a	 simple	 column	 of	 black	 stone	 –	 basalt	 perhaps	 –
rounded	 at	 the	 top	 and	 in	 places	 worn	 so	 smooth	 the	 stone	 shone	 like	 marble.	 In	 front	 of	 it	 lay	 small
offerings	of	oil,	food	and	lotus	flowers.
‘What	is	that?’	Babur	asked.
Junayd	Barlas	consulted	the	priest	but	appeared	to	have	difficulty	in	understanding	the	answer.	At	last
he	said,	‘They	call	it	a	lingam,	Majesty.	It	represents	the	male	sexual	organ	and	is	a	symbol	of	fertility.’
But	Babur’s	attention	had	been	caught	by	something	else	on	the	other	side	of	the	courtyard,	a	largerthan-life	 stone	 figure	 of	 a	 powerfully	 built	 man	 sitting	 cross-legged	 with	 arms	 raised	 beneath	 a	 carved
canopy.	Under	his	elaborate	headdress,	the	face	was	strong,	determined,	forceful,	the	eyes	staring	ahead.
‘That	is	one	of	their	gods	–	they	call	him	Shiva,’	said	the	interpreter,	after	another	hurried	consultation
with	the	priest.	But	the	old	man	evidently	had	something	else	to	say	because	he	was	continuing	to	mutter.
Junayd	Barlas	bent	lower	to	catch	his	words.	‘The	priest	wishes	you	to	know	some	words	from	one	of
their	holy	books.	“Behold,	I	am	come.	I	am	Shiva,	the	destroyer	.	.	.”’
The	 priest	 was	 watching	 him	 with	 a	 sly	 expression.	 What	 was	 he	 trying	 to	 say?	 That	 Babur	 was	 the
destroyer	who	had	come	amongst	them	–	or	that	the	Hindus	and	their	gods	would	destroy	him	.	.	.	?
He	 turned	 and	 strode	 from	 the	 inner	 courtyard,	 back	 through	 the	 main	 building	 and	 swiftly	 out	 of	 the
compound.	 He	 mounted	 his	 horse	 and,	 taking	 a	 drink	 of	 water	 from	 a	 cup	 his	 squire	 held	 up	 to	 him,
signalled	that	he	was	ready	to	ride	on.	With	his	bodyguards	behind	him,	he	kicked	his	horse	on	without	a
backward	glance	at	the	temple	and	its	mystifying	figures.
A	 few	 yards	 further	 on,	 directly	 in	 their	 path,	 a	 cow	 sprawled	 contentedly	 on	 the	 ground,	 apparently
untroubled	by	the	cloud	of	black	flies	buzzing	round	its	long-lashed	eyes.	It	was	a	wide-horned	beast	and,
by	the	standards	of	Babur’s	homeland,	a	scraggy	creature,	its	bony	hips	and	ribs	clearly	defined	beneath
its	dull	brown	hide.	One	of	Babur’s	men	trotted	forward	and	prodded	it	with	the	butt	of	his	spear.	The
animal	emitted	a	groan	of	protest	but	didn’t	move.	The	man	reversed	his	spear,	intending	to	give	the	cow
something	sharper	to	think	about	when,	from	somewhere	behind	Babur,	came	an	angry	cry.
Looking	around,	he	saw	the	priest	rush	forward	with	more	speed	than	he	would	have	thought	possible
for	such	a	spindly	frame.	The	old	man’s	face	was	contorted	as	he	shouted,	waving	his	arms	and	his	stick.
Two	 of	 Babur’s	 bodyguards	 jumped	 off	 their	 horses	 and	 seized	 him	 before	 he	 could	 come	 too	 close	 to
Babur.
Babur	signalled	to	Junayd	Barlas.	‘What	does	he	want?’
‘He	is	cursing	you,	Majesty.’
‘I’ll	have	him	flogged	for	his	insolence.’
‘You	don’t	understand,	Majesty,	he	says	the	Hindus	consider	the	cow	a	sacred	creature	that	must	be	left
free	to	roam	where	it	will.	He	feared	you	were	about	to	kill	it	.	.	.’
Babur	looked	down	at	the	old	man.	‘Let	him	go.	And	tell	him	I	didn’t	understand.	Tell	him	I	meant	no
disrespect	to	his	faith.’
As	he	listened	to	Junayd	Barlas’s	translation,	the	old	man’s	expression	relaxed.	By	now	the	cow	had
become	bored	and	rising	clumsily	to	its	feet	ambled	off	to	the	shade	of	a	tree.	Babur’s	army	was	free	to
advance	once	more	through	his	new	possessions.

Four	 days	 later,	 Babur	 and	 his	 army	 reached	 Delhi,	 whose	 governor	 offered	 no	 resistance.	 It	 was	 the
largest	 and	 most	 populous	 city	 he’d	 ever	 seen.	 The	 airy	 grace	 of	 Samarkand	 or	 Herat	 was	 missing	 but

some	parts	were	not	unpleasing.	He	inspected	the	large	sandstone	mosques,	delicately	arched	palaces	and
a	 curiously	 carved	 two	 hundred	 and	 forty	 foot	 high,	 tapering	 tower	 –	 the	 Qutb	 Minar	 –	 built	 centuries
earlier	for	reasons	no	one	seemed	to	know.	Complexes	of	royal	tombs	–	domed,	pillared,	colonnaded	–
were	 everywhere.	 These	 smacked	 to	 Babur	 of	 conceit	 –	 clearly	 the	 Delhi	 sultans	 had	 wished	 to	 be	 as
splendid	in	death	as	they	had	been	in	life.	Now	all	they	had	left	were	these	cities	of	the	dead	.	.	.
Babur	didn’t	linger	long	–	just	long	enough	to	have	the	khutba	read	in	his	name	in	the	Friday	Mosque
and	to	inspect	the	contents	of	the	imperial	treasuries,	filled	with	enough	jewels,	pearls	and	gold	to	justify
the	 expedition	 on	 their	 own	 account.	 However,	 Ibrahim’s	 nervous	 former	 chamberlain	 in	 Delhi	 –
summoned	before	Babur	–	quickly	volunteered	that	the	main	treasure	was,	just	as	Babur	had	thought,	in
Agra.	 He	 had	 done	 well	 to	 despatch	 Humayun	 there.	 After	 ordering	 an	 inventory	 to	 be	 made	 and
appointing	 one	 of	 his	 commanders	 as	 the	 city’s	 new	 governor,	 Babur	 set	 out	 south-east	 along	 the	 river
Jumna	to	join	Humayun	in	Agra.
The	 heat	 was	 so	 intense	 that	 Babur	 was	 surprised	 any	 living	 thing	 could	 stir.	 Yet	 as	 his	 journey
continued	he	noticed	more	people	than	before.	Soon	the	roads	and	fields	seemed	filled	with	them,	staring
and	 apparently	 unafraid.	 The	 tight	 discipline	 he	 had	 insisted	 on	 must	 be	 having	 its	 effect	 .	 .	 .	 His	 new
subjects	 –	 the	 men	 half	 naked	 in	 their	 loincloths	 and	 the	 women	 in	 lengths	 of	 brightly	 coloured	 cloth
wound	round	their	bodies	and	thrown	over	their	heads,	with	red	marks	on	their	foreheads	and	gold	studs
in	their	noses	–	certainly	didn’t	seem	intimidated.	They	pressed	curiously	around	Babur	and	his	army	as
they	 passed	 through	 the	 sun-baked	 villages,	 to	 which	 clung	 an	 ever-present	 sweetish	 aroma	 of	 drying
cattle	dung,	spices	and	incense,	and	even	brought	out	sacks	of	grain	and	fruit	and	vegetables	to	sell	to	the
troops.
As	 the	 days	 passed,	 the	 flat,	 brown,	 dry	 landscape	 with	 its	 teeming	 people	 beneath	 a	 relentless	 sun
began	 to	 oppress	 Babur.	 He	 felt	 leached	 of	 life	 and	 vitality.	 It	 was	 not	 much	 better	 at	 night	 when
mosquitoes	whined	and	his	attendants	could	do	little	to	cool	his	tent,	designed	for	colder	climes.	He	found
no	 refreshment	 in	 looking	 at	 the	 sluggish	 Jumna.	 Its	 fetid	 banks	 of	 cracked	 mud	 made	 him	 long	 for	 the
swift	rivers	and	bracing	air	of	his	homeland	beyond	the	Indus.
On	 the	 sixth	 evening,	 a	 messenger	 arrived	 bringing	 a	 gift	 from	 Kabul.	 In	 a	 metal-lined	 wooden	 cask
that,	at	the	start	of	its	journey,	must	have	been	packed	with	ice,	he	found	some	melons,	sent	by	Khanzada
who	knew	it	was	his	favourite	fruit.	Alone	in	his	tent,	as	he	cut	into	the	moist	flesh	and	tasted	the	sweet
juice,	tears	pricked	his	eyes,	so	strong	was	his	sense	of	exile.	Khanzada	had	meant	to	give	him	pleasure
but	her	gift	had	also	brought	him	pain.
Reaching	 for	 pen,	 ink	 and	 the	 diary	 that	 in	 recent	 months	 he	 had	 too	 often	 neglected,	 Babur	 began	 to
write:
Hindustan	is	a	land	of	few	charms.	Its	people	are	not	handsome	.	.	.	There	are	no	good	horses	or	dogs,
meat,	grapes,	fragrant	melons	or	other	excellent	fruit.	There	is	no	ice,	cold	water	or	good	provisions
in	the	bazaars.	There	are	no	hot	baths	nor	madrasas.	Except	their	rivers	and	streams,	which	flow	in
ravines	and	hollows,	there	are	no	running	waters	in	their	gardens	or	residences	.	.	.
He	 paused.	 What	 would	 Baburi,	 who	 had	 brought	 him	 the	 means	 to	 conquer	 Hindustan,	 have	 said	 to
him?	What	he	had	just	written	looked	bitter	and	carping.	Baburi	had	detested	any	sign	of	self-pity	and	had
always	been	quick	to	spot	it.	He	would	have	told	Babur	to	get	on	with	it	.	.	.	that	he	had	been	given	a	great
chance	and	it	was	his	duty	not	to	squander	it.	But	perhaps	if	Baburi	was	still	with	him,	he	wouldn’t	feel
like	this	.	.	.
Reaching	inside	his	tunic,	Babur	drew	out	the	soft	leather	pouch	in	which	he	kept	the	Koh-i-Nur,	his
Mountain	 of	 Light.	 Even	 in	 the	 gloom	 of	 the	 tent	 it	 shone,	 a	 potent	 symbol	 of	 this	 new	 land	 that	 sent

renewed	energy	and	determination	flowing	through	him.	This	was	no	time	for	regret.	If	Hindustan	was	not
yet	the	kind	of	land	he	wanted,	he	and	his	sons	must	make	it	so.	They	must	create	an	empire	so	fabulous
that,	for	centuries,	people	would	speak	of	it	with	awe.
Opening	a	fresh	page	in	his	diary,	he	began	again:
From	the	year	when	I	first	came	to	Kabul,	I	had	coveted	Hindustan.	Now,	through	God’s	great	favour,
I	have	conquered	a	mighty	adversary,	Sultan	Ibrahim,	and	won	for	my	dynasty	a	new	empire.
	
After	a	moment’s	further	thought	he	added,
	
The	best	thing	about	Hindustan	is	that	it	is	a	large	land	with	an	abundance	of	gold	and	other	wealth	.	.	.
Yes,	much	could	be	done	here	by	a	man	if	he	only	had	the	will	.	.	.

Babur’s	mood	lifted	further	as	he	continued	his	progress	south-eastward.	He	began	to	notice	that	the	land
was	not	as	bare	as	he	had	thought.	Despite	the	dryness	and	the	hot	winds,	some	flowers	bloomed,	like	the
red	gudhal	with	blossoms	deeper	in	colour	than	those	of	the	pomegranate,	and	the	oleander,	five-petalled
like	peach	blossom,	with	a	faint	but	exquisite	scent.
With	his	new	optimism	came	the	thought	that	–	if	he	was	indeed	to	establish	himself	here	–	he	must	try
to	 understand	 this	 new	 land	 and	 its	 customs.	 With	 the	 aid	 of	 Junayd	 Barlas	 as	 interpreter,	 he	 began	 to
question	 some	 of	 those	 they	 passed	 on	 the	 road,	 farmers,	 merchants,	 peasants,	 about	 the	 things	 he	 saw.
One	day	he	noticed	a	man	in	a	purple	turban	striking	with	a	mallet	a	brass	disc	big	as	a	tray	hanging	above
a	tank	of	water.	He	learned	that	this	man	was	a	ghariyali	–	a	timekeeper.	In	Babur’s	homeland	each	day
was	divided	into	twenty-four	hours	and	each	hour	into	sixty	minutes	but	he	discovered	that	in	Hindustan
his	new	subjects	apportioned	day	and	night	into	sixty	parts	–	gharis	–	of	twenty-four	minutes,	while	night
and	 day	 were	 also	 each	 divided	 into	 four	 watches,	 pahars.	 Ghariyalis	 measured	 the	 passage	 of	 each
pahar	by	submerging	in	water	special	pots	with	a	hole	in	the	bottom	that	took	exactly	one	ghari	to	fill.	At
the	end	of	the	first	ghari	of	their	watch	they	struck	a	large,	thick	brass	disc	so	that	all	could	hear.	At	the
end	 of	 the	 second	 ghari	 they	 struck	 it	 twice,	 and	 so	 on	 until	 their	 watch	 was	 over,	 when	 they	 struck	 it
many	times	in	rapid	succession.
From	a	money-lender	whom	Babur	observed	counting	coins	in	the	marketplace,	he	discovered	that	the
Hindustanis	had	an	excellent	numbering	system:	one	hundred	thousand	was	equal	to	one	lakh;	one	hundred
lakhs	equalled	one	crore;	one	hundred	crores	equalled	one	arb,	and	on	it	went,	even	higher	up	the	scale.
In	Kabul	there	was	no	need	of	such	high	numbers	but	here	in	Hindustan,	where	the	wealth	–	at	least	of	its
rulers	–	seemed	almost	limitless,	there	was.	It	was	a	pleasing	thought.
Babur	 watched	 the	 laborious	 way	 in	 which	 the	 farmers	 irrigated	 their	 fields,	 using	 leather	 buckets
hauled	from	the	well	by	oxen,	and	tasted	the	sweet,	intoxicating	wine	of	the	date	palm,	a	plant	he’d	never
seen	before.	Most	of	all	he	attempted	to	understand	more	about	the	Hindu	religion,	learning	that	Hindus
believed	 in	 reincarnation,	 and	 that	 their	 bewildering	 multiplicity	 of	 gods	 –	 from	 many-armed	 women
festooned	with	skulls	to	a	pot-bellied	elephant-man	–	were	all	manifestations	of	a	central	trio	or	trimurti:
Brahma,	the	creator	of	the	world,	sky	and	stars;	Vishnu,	who	held	them	all	in	balance	and	harmony;	and

Shiva,	the	destroyer.	But	it	still	seemed	shadowy,	confusing,	even	disturbing.	What	had	Sultan	Ibrahim	–	a
Muslim	like	himself	–	made	of	it?	Babur	thought	again	of	the	temple	priest’s	words:	‘I	am	the	destroyer
.	.	.’
He	soon	discovered	that	he	was	not	the	only	one	to	find	Hindustan	unsettling.	Sitting	outside	his	tent
one	night,	hoping	for	some	touch	of	a	breeze	on	his	face,	he	saw	Baba	Yasaval	approaching.
‘Majesty.’	His	commander	touched	his	breast	and	waited	respectfully.
‘What	is	it?’
Baba	Yasaval	hesitated.
‘Speak.’
‘Majesty,	my	men	are	growing	restless	.	.	.	They	do	not	like	this	new	land	.	.	.	these	hot,	incessant	winds
.	.	.	Many	are	becoming	sick	.	.	.’	He	paused,	torchlight	falling	on	his	mosquito-bitten	face.	‘We’re	not
cowards	–	we	never	flinched	in	battle	–	but	this	place	is	alien	to	us	.	.	.	We	want	to	return	to	Kabul.	I
speak	not	just	for	myself	and	my	men	but	for	some	of	the	other	commanders.	They	asked	me	to	speak	for
all	of	us.’
‘Summon	them	here	–	now.’
Baba	Yasaval	had	spoken	from	the	heart,	saying	what	had	been	in	Babur’s	own	mind	only	a	few	days
ago.	 But	 hearing	 those	 things	 from	 the	 lips	 of	 another	 made	 him	 realise	 how	 passionately	 he	 wanted	 to
keep	 what	 he	 had	 seized.	 While	 he	 waited,	 he	 turned	 over	 carefully	 what	 he	 must	 say.	 When	 the
commanders	 were	 gathered,	 some	 avoiding	 his	 gaze,	 he	 addressed	 them	 slowly,	 deliberately,	 his	 eyes
never	leaving	their	faces.
‘Conquest	isn’t	easy.	For	years	we’ve	struggled,	overcome	great	obstacles,	travelled	great	distances,
subjected	 ourselves	 to	 hardship	 and	 danger,	 fought	 great	 battles.	 By	 God’s	 grace	 we’ve	 overcome
numerous	enemies	and	conquered	a	vast	new	realm.	How	can	we	throw	away	what	we	have	won	at	such
great	cost?	How	can	we	go	back	to	Kabul	and	abandon	what	God	has	given	us?	What	will	our	people	say
of	us?	That	we	were	afraid	of	greatness	.	.	.’
Babur	paused	to	let	his	words	sink	in.	‘Any	man	who	wishes	may	take	his	share	of	the	booty	and	return
across	the	Indus.	But	I	promise	you	this.	When,	as	old	men,	you	sit	by	the	fire	with	your	grandchildren	and
they	ask	you	to	tell	them	what	great	warriors	you	once	were,	you	will	have	nothing	to	say.	You	will	be
ashamed	to	admit	that	you	left	your	king	–	no,	your	emperor	–	who	had	given	you	a	chance	of	seizing	the
world	.	.	.	You	will	stay	silent	and	hang	your	heads,	and	your	grandchildren	will	drift	away	.	.	.’
The	commanders	looked	at	one	another	uneasily	and	for	a	few	moments	there	was	silence.	Then,	led	by
Baba	Yasaval,	a	low	chant	began,	words	that	Babur	had	not	heard	for	many	years	which	took	him	back	to
his	 days	 as	 boy-king	 of	 Ferghana:	 ‘Babur	 Mirza!	 Babur	 Mirza!’	 The	 chant	 grew	 louder	 and	 louder,
vibrating	through	the	heavy	air.	They	were	affirming	their	allegiance	to	him,	their	king	and	Timur’s	heir.
They	would	not	leave	him.	At	least,	not	yet.

Humayun	was	waiting	in	the	courtyard,	his	commanders	behind	him,	when,	a	few	days	later,	Babur	rode
up	the	steep	ramp	into	the	mighty	Agra	fortress.	As	he	dismounted,	his	son	knelt	briefly	before	him	but
Babur	quickly	raised	and	embraced	him.
‘Father,	 the	 treasuries	 are	 secured.	 In	 the	 harem	 we	 found	 Sultan	 Ibrahim’s	 mother,	 Buwa,	 and	 his
wives	and	concubines.	Buwa	called	us	barbarians	–	she	said	she	despised	us	.	.	.	I	ignored	her	insults	and
ordered	 that	 she	 and	 the	 other	 women	 be	 well	 treated	 .	 .	 .	 We	 had	 no	 trouble	 from	 the	 local	 people	 –

indeed,	 they	 were	 relieved	 to	 see	 order	 restored.	 When	 news	 first	 came	 that	 you	 had	 defeated	 Sultan
Ibrahim,	bandits	–	dacoits	–	took	advantage	of	the	chaos	to	plunder	the	villages	and	steal	grain,	animals
and	women.	We	caught	some	and	executed	them	publicly,	here	on	the	parade-ground,	in	front	of	the	fort
where	all	could	see.’
‘You’ve	done	well.	What	did	you	find	in	the	treasuries?’
Humayun	grinned.	‘I’ve	never	seen	anything	like	it	–	whole	vaults	filled	with	gold	and	silver	.	.	.	more
gems	 than	 I	 would	 have	 believed	 the	 mines	 of	 the	 world	 could	 produce.	 Everything	 has	 been	 counted,
weighed	and	noted	.	.	.’
‘Good.	I	must	reward	my	men	well	and	I’ll	send	money	to	every	 man,	 woman	 and	 child	 in	 Kabul	 in
celebration	of	our	success.	In	a	few	days’	time,	we	will	hold	a	victory	feast,	but	now	there	are	things	I
need	to	discuss	with	you	and	something	I	must	ask.	On	the	road	from	Delhi,	I	had	time	to	reflect	.	.	.	I
thought	of	other	great	warriors	drawn,	like	us,	to	Hindustan	–	Alexander	of	Macedonia,	who	brought	his
army	over	the	Indus	but	turned	back,	and	Timur	who	raided	Delhi	but	did	not	stay	.	.	.	I	began	to	wonder
whether	we	could	prosper	here	.	.	.	Some	of	my	men,	brave	as	they	are,	also	began	to	question	it	.	.	.	They
don’t	 like	 this	 place	 .	 .	 .	 We	 could	 just	 pile	 all	 this	 treasure	 on	 to	 the	 backs	 of	 our	 pack-beasts	 and	 go
home.	If	we	stay,	we	face	many	more	difficulties	and	dangers.
‘Panipat	was	a	great	victory	but	it	was	just	the	start.	Only	a	part	of	this	land	is	ours	–	in	truth	no	more
than	a	corridor	a	mere	two	hundred	miles	wide,	even	if	it	does	extend	a	thousand	miles	down	from	the
Khyber	Pass.	We’ve	met	little	resistance	since	Panipat	but	only	because	the	other	rulers	of	Hindustan	have
withdrawn	 to	 their	 strongholds	 to	 watch	 and	 wait.	 They	 think	 we’re	 mere	 barbarian	 raiders,	 nomads,
whose	rule	will	be	as	easily	blown	away	as	the	morning	mist.	Already	they	will	be	plotting	to	challenge
and	expel	us.	We	must	ask	ourselves	whether	we	have	the	stomach	to	fight	and	fight	again	until	we	can
call	ourselves	secure	here.	Have	you	that	strength,	that	will,	as	I	do?’
‘I	have,	Father.’	Humayun’s	brown	eyes	looked	unflinchingly	at	Babur.
‘Then	we	cannot	fail,	I’m	sure	of	it.	I’ve	chosen	a	name	for	our	new	dynasty	and	lands.	On	the	journey
from	Delhi,	a	messenger	caught	up	with	me	bearing	an	impudent	message	from	the	Shah	of	Persia,	written
before	he’d	learned	of	our	victory	at	Panipat.	He	said	that	he	had	heard	of	my	enterprise	–	a	“brigand’s
raid”	he	called	it.	He	called	me	a	“Moghul”	–	the	Persian	word	for	“Mongol”	–	in	hopes	of	insulting	me
as	 a	 barbarian	 pillager.	 But	 I	 wrote	 back	 that	 I	 take	 as	 much	 pride	 in	 my	 descent	 from	 Genghis	 Khan,
greatest	of	all	the	Mongols,	as	I	do	in	my	descent	from	Timur.	To	be	called	a	“Moghul”	is	no	insult.	I	told
him	I	will	carry	that	name	with	pride	and	so	will	our	new	empire	which,	God	willing,	might	soon	eclipse
his	own.’

Preceded	 by	 two	 guards	 with	 drawn	 ceremonial	 swords,	 Babur	 slowly	 approached	 the	 gilded	 leather
double-doors	of	what	had	been	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	private	entrance	to	his	apartments	where	his	commanders
now	awaited	him	for	the	victory	feast.	Their	men	were	already	celebrating	in	the	courtyards	below	and	in
tents	set	up	along	the	riverbanks.	No	one	who	had	helped	in	his	victory	must	go	unrewarded.
In	the	torchlight	the	emeralds	in	Babur’s	turban	flashed.	Round	his	neck	hung	a	triple	string	of	yet	more
emeralds	 intertwined	 with	 pearls	 and	 on	 his	 finger	 was	 Timur’s	 ring.	 His	 green	 brocade	 tunic	 was
fastened	at	one	side	with	bunches	of	pearls	and	Alamgir	hung	from	a	heavy	gold	chain	at	his	waist.	Gazing
at	his	reflection	a	few	minutes	earlier	he	had	been	satisfied	to	see	a	glittering	image	–	the	embodiment	of
power	and	magnificence.

To	a	blast	of	trumpets,	attendants	threw	open	the	doors	and	Babur	entered.	Instantly	there	was	silence
as	 each	 of	 his	 commanders,	 themselves	 elaborately	 dressed,	 fell	 to	 the	 ground	 to	 perform	 the	 formal
obeisance	of	the	korunush.	Ahead	of	Babur	in	the	very	centre	of	the	room	was	a	tiered	white	marble	dais.
On	 the	 highest	 tier	 was	 a	 golden,	 jewel-encrusted	 throne	 beneath	 a	 green	 and	 yellow	 canopy.	 His
commanders,	lined	up	in	rows	before	the	dais,	remained	prostrate	while	Babur,	head	high,	back	straight,
ascended	it,	took	his	place	and	gestured	to	Humayun	to	seat	himself	on	a	blue	velvet	stool	placed	on	the
right	side	of	the	tier	below.
‘You	may	rise.’	Babur	waited	until	all	eyes	were	upon	him.	‘God	was	magnanimous	to	us	at	Panipat.
He	 gave	 us	 victory	 because	 ours	 was	 a	 just	 cause.	 The	 throne	 of	 Hindustan	 is	 our	 birthright.	 Sultan
Ibrahim,	who	tried	to	oppose	us,	is	dead.	All	of	us	–	all	of	you,	my	commanders,	who	came	through	fire
and	water	with	me	–	are	the	victors.	This	is	the	beginning	of	a	new	page	of	our	history,	a	new	destiny	for
our	people,	now	that	we	have	made	ourselves	the	masters	of	Hindustan.	Still	greater	glories	lie	ahead,	but
tonight	let	us	forget	everything	but	the	sweet	taste	of	our	victory	.	.	.’	Babur	stood,	raised	his	arms	above
his	head	and	cried,	‘	To	our	new	empire!’	as	a	great	roar	of	acclamation	burst	out	around	him.
Sultan	Ibrahim	had	lived	well,	Babur	thought	a	little	while	later	as	he	looked	critically	about	him.	With
its	finely	carved	red	sandstone	columns,	central	cupola	and	rose-pink	silken	hangings	this	chamber	was
more	magnificent	than	anything	he	had	seen	since	Samarkand.	Fragrant	smoke	curled	from	two	tall	golden
incense	burners	shaped	like	peacocks	with	outspread	tails	of	sapphires	and	emeralds	on	either	side	of	the
dais.	 The	 wall	 to	 Babur’s	 right	 was	 a	 carved	 sandalwood	 purdah	 screen	 separating	 the	 room	 from	 the
adjoining	harem.
In	the	week	since	he	and	his	exhausted	army	had	arrived	at	Agra,	the	temperature	had	fallen	a	little	and
a	 breeze	 had	 at	 last	 begun	 to	 blow	 –	 perhaps	 this	 always	 happened	 in	 the	 last	 days	 before	 the	 rains	 or
perhaps	it	was	just	good	fortune.	Babur	watched	the	silk	hangings	stirring	gently.
He	 and	 his	 guests	 were	 also	 being	 cooled	 by	 punkahs,	 huge	 rectangular	 pieces	 of	 flowered	 brocade
suspended	on	long	silk	cords	which	ran	through	iron	rings	in	the	ceiling	before	disappearing	through	small
apertures	high	in	the	walls	to	be	pulled	by	punkah	 wallahs	 –	 concealed	 on	 the	 other	 side	 –	 so	 that	 the
brocade	 swung	 slowly	 to	 and	 fro	 above	 the	 diners’	 heads.	 At	 low	 tables	 set	 up	 along	 the	 walls	 facing
Babur,	they	were	feeding	on	roasted	mutton,	stewed	chickens	and	flat	bread,	the	food	of	their	homeland,
but	also	the	fruits	of	Hindustan:	orange-fleshed	mangoes	oozing	juice,	creamy,	soft	papaya	and	dates.
Many,	 like	 him,	 traced	 their	 descent	 from	 the	 clans	 of	 Genghis	 Khan	 and	 Timur.	 All	 had	 served	 him
well.	Before	the	feasting	had	begun,	he	had	bestowed	gifts	–	robes	of	honour	of	scarlet	silk,	sable	jackets
faced	 in	 blue,	 jewelled	 daggers,	 swords	 and	 gilded	 saddles.	 Babur	 could	 see	 their	 satisfaction.	 Baba
Yasaval	was	examining	the	emerald-studded	hilt	of	the	curved	sabre	he	had	given	him.
As	 he	 ate,	 Babur	 glanced	 towards	 the	 purdah	 screen	 to	 his	 right.	 Normally	 during	 feasts	 the	 royal
women	 would	 have	 been	 sitting	 behind	 it,	 observing	 what	 was	 happening	 through	 the	 fretwork	 as	 they
feasted,	 too.	 Could	 Buwa	 in	 her	 apartments	 within	 the	 harem	 hear	 these	 sounds	 of	 celebration	 coming
from	 her	 son’s	 former	 quarters?	 Babur	 hoped	 not.	 Her	 grief	 and	 courage,	 as	 much	 as	 her	 royal	 blood,
deserved	 his	 respect.	 The	 venomous	 words	 she	 had	 spat	 at	 Humayun	 were	 no	 reason	 to	 punish	 her.
Wouldn’t	Esan	Dawlat	have	said	exactly	same	if	it	was	Babur	who	had	been	killed	and	his	throne	seized?
He	had	decreed	that	Buwa	could	keep	her	jewels	and	servants	and	had	granted	her	a	pension.	He	hoped
that	in	time	she	would	be	reconciled	by	his	generosity.
Earlier	that	day,	on	the	banks	of	the	river,	Babur	had	staged	fights	between	trained	male	elephants	from
Sultan	Ibrahim’s	stables	with	names	like	Mountain	Destroyer	and	Ever	Bold.	Goaded	by	riders	sitting	on
their	 necks,	 the	 enormous,	 painted	 beasts	 had	 faced	 one	 another	 across	 a	 specially	 constructed	 earth
rampart,	slashing	at	each	other	with	their	great	tusks	until	one	lost	heart	and	retreated.	Now	it	was	time

for	something	different	–	the	Hindustani	acrobats	and	dancers	who	had	belonged	to	Ibrahim’s	household.
Babur	clapped	his	hands.
Two	young	men,	their	oiled	bodies	naked	but	for	orange	loincloths,	their	long	black	hair	knotted	on	top
of	 their	 heads,	 ran	 lightly	 in	 to	 where	 space	 had	 been	 cleared	 before	 Babur’s	 dais.	 Between	 them	 they
carried	 an	 oblong	 yellow	 box	 about	 three	 feet	 long	 and	 eighteen	 inches	 wide	 with	 a	 mysterious	 eye
painted	in	red	on	each	side.	They	put	the	box	down	and	stepped	away	from	it.	Babur’s	men	gasped	as,
slowly	–	as	if	of	its	own	accord	–	the	lid	began	to	open.	One	small	hand	appeared,	and	then	another,	and
suddenly	the	lid	was	thrown	back	to	reveal	a	boy	with	his	legs	hooked	back	over	his	shoulders.	It	seemed
incredible	that	any	human	–	even	one	as	lithe	as	this	youth	who	must	be	double-jointed	–	could	contort
himself	 into	 such	 a	 space.	 Unravelling	 himself,	 the	 boy	 stepped	 out	 of	 the	 box	 and,	 as	 the	 other	 two
acrobats	spun	brass	hoops	around	their	foreheads,	knees,	hands	and	feet,	somersaulted	around	the	room,
slim	legs	flashing	so	fast	they	were	a	blur.
Next,	one	of	the	young	men	jumped	up	on	the	shoulders	of	the	other	and	the	boy	then	shinned	up	the	two
of	them	as	easily	as	if	he	were	climbing	an	apple	tree.	Balancing	on	the	head	of	the	topmost	man,	he	threw
back	his	own	head	and	a	rush	of	flame	came	from	his	mouth.	Babur’s	commanders	yelled	their	approval.
Quick	as	a	flash	the	boy	was	on	the	floor	again.	Coiling	up	his	limbs,	he	fitted	himself	back	into	his	box
and,	 with	 a	 farewell	 flourish	 of	 his	 hand,	 snapped	 the	 lid	 shut.	 The	 other	 two	 acrobats	 bowed	 before
Babur,	who	threw	them	gold	coins.	Then	they	picked	up	the	box	and	to	thunderous	applause	bore	it	away.
A	 rhythmic	 stamping	 and	 jingling	 announced	 a	 line	 of	 eight	 barefoot	 dancing	 girls	 who	 entered	 the
chamber	 one	 by	 one	 through	 a	 small	 servants’	 door.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 musicians	 came	 in	 by	 another
entrance.	The	girls	formed	a	circle	before	Babur.	Their	thick,	dark	hair	was	plaited	with	sweet-smelling
white	 flowers.	 Above	 red	 and	 purple	 many-layered	 skirts	 their	 midriffs	 were	 bare.	 Tight-fitting	 silk
bodices	 revealed	 more	 than	 they	 concealed	 of	 their	 breasts,	 and	 rows	 of	 tiny	 bells	 were	 twined	 round
their	wrists	and	ankles.	Six	drummers	in	baggy	white	trousers	and	with	chests	naked	beneath	open	goldcloth	waistcoats	began	to	beat	with	their	palms	on	the	long,	thin	drums	suspended	from	around	their	necks,
jumping	and	swaying	in	time	to	the	beat.	The	dancers’	bodies	began	to	undulate	rhythmically.	Soon	they
were	whirling	faster	and	faster,	skirts	flying	up	around	them	revealing	their	long,	slender	legs	and	hands
pressed	 together	 above	 their	 thrown-back	 heads.	 As	 they	 danced	 they	 sang,	 their	 high-pitched,	 honeysweet	voices	rising	and	falling.
The	other	musicians	joined	in,	playing	instruments	Babur	had	never	seen	before	–	a	sort	of	lute	but	with
a	neck	over	a	metre	long	that	he	was	told	was	a	tanpura,	another	stringed	instrument	with	two	bowls,	a
rudra-vina,	 and	 a	 wind	 instrument	 like	 a	 compressed	 trumpet,	 a	 shahnai.	 Babur	 felt	 the	 whole
performance	with	its	fluid,	lithe	young	bodies,	pulsing	drums,	plangent	strings	and	cascading	voices	was
of	an	overwhelming,	compelling	sensuality	unique	to	his	new	kingdom.
It	was	late	but	Babur	realised	that	his	men,	pulses	raised	by	the	dancers,	were	just	getting	started.	Some
were	singing,	in	deep	bass	voices,	the	songs	of	the	steppes	and	mountains	they’d	left	behind.	Others	were
getting	up,	arm	in	arm,	to	dance	wild,	martial	dances,	stamping	and	shouting,	sharing	this	great	moment	of
joy	and	triumph.	Humayun	left	his	stool	to	join	them.
Babur,	though,	was	lost	in	his	thoughts.	He	was	celebrating	more	than	a	victory.	Tonight	was	the	start	of
a	 new	 phase	 in	 his	 life	 when	 he	 would	 bring	 everything	 he	 had	 done,	 everything	 he	 had	 learned,	 to
glorious	fruition.	But	the	elation	was	bitter-sweet.	Another	face	should	have	been	at	the	feast,	sharing	in	it
all,	but	wasn’t	–	that	of	his	truest	friend	and	wisest	commander.	Babur	picked	up	his	goblet	and	drank	a
silent	tribute	to	Baburi.

	
	
	

Chapter	24
Buwa
	

As	 Babur	 looked	 out	 one	 Friday	 evening	 from	 a	 covered	 watch-tower	 on	 the	 battlements	 of	 the	 Agra
fort,	the	sky	was	piled	with	deep	grey,	almost	purple,	stormclouds	that	were	releasing	sheet	after	sheet	of
rain.	The	raindrops	were	bouncing	off	the	flagstones	of	the	courtyard	and	rainwater	was	pouring	from	the
drainage	channels	out	through	the	holes	cut	in	the	sandstone	walls.	On	the	northern	and	eastern	sides	of	the
fort,	it	fell	fountain-like	into	the	muddy	waters	of	the	river	Jumna	in	full	spate	below.	On	the	southern	and
western	 sides,	 it	 cascaded	 down	 into	 the	 already	 large	 pools	 that	 had	 formed	 on	 the	 parade-ground.
Occasionally	flashes	of	lightning	lit	the	low,	misty	horizon,	accompanied	by	the	distant	rumble	and	growl
of	thunder.
To	the	watching	Babur	the	air	felt	cloyingly	warm	and	humid,	so	different	from	the	intense	dry	summer
heat	at	this	time	of	year	in	Central	Asia.	Here	in	Hindustan,	the	rains	the	native	people	called	the	monsoon
had	already	lasted	three	months.	Damp	got	into	everything,	mildewing	furnishings	and	clothes	if	given	a
chance.	He	had	even	had	to	have	his	precious	diaries	dried	before	a	fire	to	get	rid	of	the	moisture	that	had
penetrated	the	metal	casket	in	which	he	kept	them.
Still,	he	reflected,	shortly	he	was	to	dine	quietly	in	his	apartments	with	Humayun	which	was	good	–	he
wasn’t	in	the	mood	for	wider	company.	He	had	commanded	his	chief	cook	to	make	one	of	his	favourite
dishes:	a	stew	of	tender	young	rabbit	cooked	slowly	in	a	sauce	of	cumin	and	raisins	into	which	curd	was
stirred	just	before	serving.	He	had	also	asked	that	the	four	chefs	he	had	retained	from	Sultan	Ibrahim’s
household	to	introduce	him	to	the	tastes	of	his	new	kingdom	should	produce	some	of	their	heavily	spiced,
garlicky	 dishes	 of	 which	 he	 was	 becoming	 increasingly	 fond.	 The	 thought	 of	 the	 food	 awaiting	 him
banished	the	incipient	headache	which	the	monsoon	so	often	produced	in	him.	Turning,	he	made	his	way
down	from	the	tower	to	his	own	apartments.
Humayun	 was	 already	 sitting	 cross-legged	 at	 a	 large,	 low	 table	 covered	 with	 a	 turquoise	 linen	 cloth
and	 set	 with	 silver	 plates.	 In	 the	 middle,	 a	 large	 platter	 was	 piled	 with	 buttered	 rice	 into	 which
pistachios,	almonds	and	other	nuts	had	been	stirred.	As	Babur	entered,	Humayun	rose	to	embrace	him.	A
little	taller	than	his	father,	he	was	broad	and	muscled	–	the	expedition	to	Hindustan	had	brought	him	to
manhood.	Babur	smiled	and	motioned	to	his	son	to	sit.	Then,	with	a	clap	of	his	hands,	he	indicated	to	the
two	attendants,	both	dressed	entirely	in	white,	that	they	should	bring	in	the	rest	of	the	food.	Within	minutes
they	were	back,	accompanied	by	four	others,	all	carrying	large	metal	dishes	covered	with	cloths.	As	they
removed	them,	a	delicious	smell	of	spices	filled	the	room.
‘Majesty,	this	is	one	of	the	Hindustani	chefs’	dishes	–	chicken	simmered	in	a	rich	stock	with	crushed
mustard	 and	 coriander	 seeds,	 ginger,	 cardamom	 and	 cinnamon.	 This	 is	 lamb	 cooked	 with	 butter,	 bright
yellow	 turmeric,	 onions	 and	 lentils.	 Then	 there	 is	 another	 dish	 of	 chicken,	 with	 spinach	 –	 saag	 as	 the
people	here	call	it	–	garlic	and	fenugreek	seeds	baked	in	a	pot	over	a	fire	to	give	it	a	smoky	flavour.	Then
there	are	vegetable	stews	with	okra	and	aubergine	–	each	excellent	tasting.’
‘All	very	well	and	very	good,	I	am	sure,	but	where	is	my	rabbit	with	raisins?’
‘Your	steward	is	bringing	it.’	As	the	attendant	spoke,	the	steward	–	a	tall,	grey-haired	man	–	brought	in

the	dish	and	removing	the	lid	showed	it	to	Babur.
‘It	looks	as	good	as	ever,	Ahmed.’
‘Thank	you,	Majesty.’
‘Let	my	son	try	some	of	the	Hindustani	dishes	so	he	can	advise	me	on	which	to	taste,	but	first	give	me
some	rabbit.’
The	two	men	began	to	eat.	‘Tell	me	what	arrangements	you’ve	made	for	the	embassy	to	the	Sultan	of
Gujarat.’	Babur	spoke	through	a	mouthful	of	rabbit	stew.
‘I’ve	asked	that	it	be	ready	to	leave	as	soon	as	the	roads	are	passable	following	the	rains.	They	tell	me
this	should	be	early	October.	Is	that	soon	enough?’
‘I’m	sorry	–	repeat	the	last	bit.	I	had	a	sudden	cramp	in	my	stomach	which	took	my	mind	entirely	away
from	Gujarat.’
‘Father	–	are	you	alright?’
Babur	was	not.	His	face	was	covered	with	a	cold,	clammy	sweat	and	he	felt	another	cramp	convulse
his	stomach	like	a	red-hot	iron	hand	had	squeezed	it.	He	doubled	up	in	pain,	motioning	to	Humayun	and	an
attendant	to	help	him	to	his	feet.	As	they	did	so,	yet	another	cramp	seized	him	and	sour	vomit	rose	into	his
mouth.	 He	 tried	 to	 swallow	 it	 back	 once,	 then	 again,	 as	 his	 gullet	 heaved	 once	 more.	 He	 had	 not	 gone
more	than	three	paces	from	the	table	when	he	vomited,	retching	from	the	pit	of	his	stomach.	Undigested
rabbit	mixed	with	the	red	wine	and	sweetmeats	he	had	eaten	earlier	splashed	on	to	the	exquisite	rich	pink
and	purple	carpet.
Babur	retched	again	as	yet	another	spasm	gripped	him.	This	time,	mucus	and	bile	were	mixed	with	the
food	as	well	as	what	looked	like	flecks	of	blood.	He	clutched	his	stomach	in	agony.	‘Forgive	me.	I	don’t
know	what’s	the	matter.	I	am	never	sick	–	not	even	when	I’ve	taken	too	much	wine.	Lay	me	over	there	on
that	divan.’
Humayun	and	the	attendant	eased	Babur	on	to	the	cushions	and	Humayun	ordered	the	hakim	to	be	sent
for.	‘Drink	this	water,	Father.’	Babur	obediently	sipped	from	the	goblet	Humayun	held	out	but	as	soon	as
the	water	contacted	his	stomach,	it	convulsed	again	and	Babur	vomited	in	a	projectile	stream.
‘Take	me	to	the	latrines	–	my	bowels	are	about	to	give	way	too.’	Babur	tried	to	rise.	Humayun	halfcarried,	 half-supported	 his	 father	 to	 the	 latrines	 where	 he	 voided	 his	 bowels	 liquidly,	 noisily	 and
noisomely.
As	he	emerged	after	five	painful	minutes,	Babur	was	standing	slightly	more	upright	than	he	had	been
before	 but	 his	 face	 was	 still	 pale	 and	 sweating.	 ‘Humayun	 –	 do	 not	 let	 them	 dispose	 of	 the	 vomit	 –	 I
suspect	I’ve	been	poisoned	–	have	the	vomit	scraped	from	the	carpet	and	given	to	one	of	the	dogs.	Have
some	of	the	remains	of	the	rabbit	stew	given	to	another.	Keep	the	cook,	the	tasters	and	the	other	servants
under	guard.	I	must	lie	down.	I	feel	very	weak.’

Early	 next	 morning,	 Humayun	 was	 at	 his	 father’s	 bedside.	 Babur	 was	 still	 pale	 and	 there	 were	 purple
bags	beneath	his	eyes	but	he	looked	in	less	pain.
‘He	can	take	some	liquid	without	vomiting,’	said	the	brown-robed	hakim,	Abdul-Malik,	a	sturdy,	greyeyed	man	who	had	come	with	Babur	from	Kabul	and	had	treated	him	and	his	family	for	many	years.
‘We	followed	your	directions,	Father.	We	gave	the	vomit	to	one	dog	and	some	rabbit	stew	to	another
and	watched	them	throughout	the	night.	The	first	was	sick,	and	had	violent	diarrhoea	–	just	as	you	did	–
then	slowly	recovered.	The	second	lay	motionless	and	whimpering	for	hours,	its	stomach	distended.	Even

when	we	provoked	it	by	throwing	stones	we	could	not	induce	it	to	move	or	even	bark.	But	then	–	an	hour
ago	 –	 it	 too	 vomited	 and	 is	 now	 moving	 again.	 The	 learned	 hakims	 spent	 all	 night	 consulting	 their
volumes.	They	confirm	that	your	symptoms	and	those	of	the	two	dogs	are	indeed	those	of	poison.’
‘I	thought	as	much.’
‘How	can	you	have	been	poisoned?	You	have	food	tasters	and	the	cooks	are	not	left	unsupervised	.	.	.’
‘Money	will	often	overcome	loyalty.	We	must	find	out	who	is	responsible	and	punish	them	hard	–	so
hard,	 so	 harsh	 must	 be	 the	 punishments	 that	 this	 will	 never	 happen	 again.	 Question	 the	 chefs,	 then	 the
tasters.	Put	any	who	seem	even	a	little	evasive	to	the	torture.	Ask	Ahmed	first	whom	he	suspects.	Start
with	them	and	don’t	stop	until	you	have	the	answers.	I’ve	suffered	enough	pain.	Let	them	suffer	too.’
Two	 hours	 later	 Humayun	 returned,	 his	 face	 grave.	 ‘You	 were	 right	 .	 .	 .	 you	 were	 poisoned	 .	 .	 .	 the
culprits	have	confessed	and	revealed	their	backer.’
‘Tell	me.’
‘Ahmed	 suggested	 that	 we	 start	 first	 with	 one	 of	 the	 Hindustani	 cooks	 –	 a	 small	 stringy	 fellow	 who
served	Ibrahim	for	ten	years	and	had	been	seeking	permission	to	visit	his	relations	in	the	next	few	days.
Even	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 red-hot	 irons	 was	 too	 much	 for	 him.	 He	 blubbed	 and	 blurted	 out	 what	 he	 knew.
Roshanna,	an	old	serving	woman	of	Ibrahim’s	mother,	Buwa,	had	come	to	him.	She	told	him	Buwa	wanted
revenge	against	the	“barbarians”,	as	she	called	us,	for	the	death	of	her	son	–	the	cook’s	old	master.	To
poison	you	would	be	an	act	of	merit	and	of	profit	and	she	offered	him	two	gold	pieces.	He	accepted	and
she	gave	him	the	poison	in	a	little	paper	packet.
‘He	is	a	crafty	man.	He	bided	his	time	and	ingratiated	himself	with	one	of	your	tasters	–	one	of	our	own
people	who	was	so	anxious	to	return	home	that	he	was	prepared	to	be	bribed	not	to	taste	your	rabbit	stew
.	 .	 .	 the	 cook	 cunningly	 preferred	 to	 poison	 the	 stew	 rather	 than	 one	 of	 the	 Hindustani	 dishes	 to	 avert
suspicion.	Then,	at	the	last	minute,	the	cook	was	disturbed	just	as	he	was	sprinkling	his	poison	into	the
stew.	He	only	managed	to	tip	half	of	it	in	and	threw	the	rest	into	a	cooking	fire.
‘We	questioned	the	taster	and	the	old	woman.	The	taster	was	soon	begging	for	mercy	but	Roshanna	is	of
sterner	stuff.	Eventually	she	broke	under	the	hot	iron	so	far	as	to	confess	her	own	part	–	but	we	had	to
hold	her	head	under	water	for	minutes	to	make	her	reveal	her	mistress’s	involvement.’
‘You	have	done	well.’
‘What	shall	we	do	with	the	traitors?’
‘They	must	die	publicly	and	painfully.’
‘Buwa	too?’
‘No,	she	is	of	a	royal	line.	For	the	present	confine	her	to	a	room	in	one	of	the	watch-towers	from	which
she	can	witness	the	executions.’
‘How	should	the	others	die?’
‘Hack	the	cook	limb	from	limb.	Let	the	taster,	whose	breach	of	trust	was	the	greatest,	being	one	of	our
own	people,	be	whipped	to	death.	And	let	the	old	woman	be	pressed	beneath	the	elephants’	feet	in	the
Hindustani	 way.	 Do	 it	 at	 midday	 –	 and	 be	 sure	 that	 a	 good	 crowd,	 including	 all	 the	 kitchen	 staff,	 is
assembled	to	see	the	example	made.	You	must	take	charge.	I	am	still	too	weak.’

It	was	no	longer	raining	but	the	sky	was	still	grey	and	lowering	as	Humayun	sat	beneath	a	red	canopy	on	a
dais	hastily	erected	among	the	puddles	of	the	parade-ground	to	watch	the	executions.	The	cook	had	died
quickly,	and	his	bloody	and	dismembered	limbs	had	been	carried	off	to	be	impaled	separately	over	the

fort	gates.	The	taster’s	high-pitched	cries	as	the	whips	fell	on	him	–	spread-eagled	and	naked	–	had	been
almost	 animal.	 They	 had	 lasted	 a	 long	 time	 but	 he	 had	 at	 last	 grown	 silent	 and	 his	 mangled	 body	 was
being	dragged	away	by	the	heels	through	the	muddy	puddles	to	be	exhibited	on	the	battlements.	Now	it
was	Roshanna’s	turn.
Four	 guards	 led	 the	 old	 woman	 out	 of	 a	 small	 gate	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 one	 of	 the	 fort’s	 towers.	 She	 was
dressed	in	a	simple	white	tunic.	With	her	grey	hair	and	calm	demeanour	she	looked	–	as	she	probably	was
–	a	kind	grandmother.	Ignoring	the	crowd,	some	of	whom	spat	at	her	and	shouted	insults	as	she	passed,
she	looked	straight	ahead	and	walked	steadily	to	a	slightly	raised	stone	slab	ten	yards	in	front	of	Humayun
on	which	her	execution	was	to	take	place.	Before	any	of	the	guards	could	push	her,	she	had	lain	on	it,	face
up.	Guards	bound	her	hands	and	feet	to	the	four	iron	rings	set	into	the	slab	for	the	purpose.	At	the	sound	of
a	trumpet,	a	red-painted	elephant	began	making	its	way	slowly	from	the	stables	on	the	opposite	side	of	the
parade-ground,	and	guards	cleared	a	path	for	it	through	the	large	crowd.
The	 elephant	 –	 a	 particularly	 large	 male	 –	 had	 been	 specially	 trained	 to	 act	 as	 executioner.	 Such
punishments	had	been	commonplace	under	Ibrahim.	At	a	command	from	his	driver,	sitting	as	usual	behind
his	ears,	he	lifted	his	massive	right	front	foot	and	placed	it	above	the	old	woman’s	body.	Still	she	made	no
sound.	 Then,	 at	 another	 command,	 the	 elephant	 obediently	 brought	 the	 foot	 and	 its	 full	 weight	 down	 on
Roshanna.	 Humayun	 heard	 no	 scream	 just	 a	 soft	 squelch	 followed	 by	 a	 crunch	 as	 the	 elephant’s	 foot
ruptured	Roshanna’s	stomach,	spilled	her	intestines	and	crunched	her	spine	and	pelvis.	Then	as	she	lay
squashed	and	lifeless,	her	white	linen	shift	stained	with	her	bodily	fluids,	the	driver	gave	the	beast	the
order	 to	 turn	 and	 begin	 to	 make	 its	 way	 back	 through	 the	 now	 silent	 onlookers	 to	 the	 stable.	 It	 did	 so
deliberately,	raising	its	gory	foot	from	the	body.
Before	it	had	taken	more	than	five	steps,	Humayun	heard	a	disturbance	on	the	battlements	behind	him.
Turning,	 he	 saw	 a	 woman	 run	 along	 them,	 her	 dark	 garments	 billowing	 around	 her	 in	 the	 rising	 breeze,
which	carried	her	words	to	him:	‘Rest	in	Paradise,	my	son	Ibrahim,	my	faithful	Roshanna.	I	come	to	join
you,	 crying	 curses	 on	 the	 upstart	 Babur	 and	 his	 four	 sons.	 May	 Hindustan	 slip	 from	 his	 grasp.	 May	 his
sons	quarrel	and	destroy	each	other.	May	they	all	fall	to	the	dust.’
Buwa,	Humayun	realised.	As	he	watched,	she	evaded	the	guards	pursuing	her	and,	reaching	a	position
above	the	Jumna,	plunged	headlong	into	the	river	and	was	carried	away,	long	black	hair	streaming	around
her	in	the	frothing	waters,	still	screaming	defiance.	Just	as	the	waters	engulfed	her,	a	flash	of	lightning,
followed	 immediately	 by	 a	 crash	 of	 thunder	 directly	 overhead,	 heralded	 the	 breaking	 of	 the	 long
threatened	 storm.	 The	 rain	 began	 to	 beat	 down,	 splashing	 into	 the	 parade-ground’s	 muddy	 puddles,	 as
Humayun	hastily	retreated	into	the	shelter	of	the	fort.
That	night,	images	of	Buwa	flinging	herself	from	the	battlements	coalesced	in	Humayun’s	dreams	with
the	stories	Babur	had	told	him	of	his	grandfather’s	fall	from	the	walls	of	Akhsi	among	his	fluttering	doves.

‘I	am	much	better,’	Babur	told	Humayun	three	days	later.	‘The	opium	Abdul-Malik	gave	me	mixed	in	milk
has	quieted	my	cramps.	For	the	first	time	I	really	felt	death’s	hand	upon	me	.	.	.	There	have	been	many,
many	occasions	when	I	might	easily	have	died	but	afterwards	I	didn’t	give	them	a	thought.	This	time	I’m
just	so	glad	to	be	alive.	Even	the	smallest	things	give	me	pleasure	–	the	sight	of	a	flower,	the	sound	of
birdsong	through	the	stone	casement.	I	was	just	writing	my	thoughts	in	my	diary	–	listen	.	.	.
‘“I	have	come	to	value	each	day	God	grants	me.	I	didn’t	understand	fully	before	that	life	was	so	sweet
a	thing.	Whoever	approaches	the	gates	of	death	learns	the	value	of	life.	I	pray	merciful	God	to	allow	me

long	to	enjoy	my	life	and	my	sons.”’

	
	
	

Chapter	25
Jihad
	
‘

The	 water	 channels	 will	 intersect	 there,	 in	 a	 pool	 at	 the	 center,	 which	 will	 have	 fountains	 and	 water

lilies.	 I	 intend	 to	 plant	 apple,	 pear	 and	 quince	 trees	 in	 the	 garden	 to	 remind	 me	 of	 our	 homeland.	 The
gardeners	 say	 they	 will	 need	 to	 be	 watered	 every	 day	 in	 this	 climate	 but	 labourers	 are	 plentiful	 and
cheap.’
Babur	and	Humayun	were	standing	on	the	north	bank	of	the	Jumna	river,	about	a	mile	downstream	from
where	its	brown	waters	took	a	sharp,	right-angled	turn	by	the	Agra	fort.	Babur	was	showing	his	son	the
progress	the	workers	had	made	on	the	first	garden	he	had	commissioned	in	Agra.
‘What	else	will	you	have	planted?’
‘I	want	lots	of	sweet-smelling	plants	that	will	produce	scent	during	the	evening	–	one	of	my	favourite
times	for	sitting	in	the	garden.	The	chief	gardener	tells	me	that	there	are	many	kinds	of	stocks	and	also	the
creamy,	 white,	 night-flowering	 champa	 flower	 that	 will	 suit	 my	 purpose.	 He	 is	 a	 good	 man	 and	 works
well	 to	 my	 instructions,	 even	 though	 he	 was	 once	 one	 of	 Sultan	 Ibrahim’s	 gardeners.’	 Babur	 paused.	 ‘I
only	 wish	 more	 people,	 both	 inside	 and	 outside	 our	 borders,	 were	 as	 ready	 to	 accept	 us	 as	 the	 new
masters	of	Hindustan.	I	understand	–	even	if	I	don’t	accept	–	the	hostility	of	those	who	had	close	ties	to
Sultan	 Ibrahim.	 I	 can	 hardly	 blame	 his	 mother	 for	 what	 she	 did	 –	 it	 was	 a	 kind	 of	 display	 of	 loyalty,	 I
suppose.	Nor	am	I	too	worried	about	the	Shah	of	Persia	at	the	moment,	even	though	he	is	always	craftily
probing	our	north-western	borders	in	Afghanistan,	trying	to	buy	supporters	around	Kandahar	and	Quetta.
We	have	enough	money	from	the	miserly	Ibrahim’s	brimming	treasuries	to	outbribe	the	shah	–	at	least	for
now.’
‘Who	is	it	then	that	concerns	you	most?’
‘The	Rajputs,	to	the	west	of	us	here	in	Agra.	From	their	strong	citadels	and	mountain	fortresses	they
used	to	maintain	a	kind	of	armed	neutrality	with	Ibrahim,	even	sometimes	hiring	him	soldiers	to	fight	in
his	distant	campaigns.	They	are	brave,	brave	soldiers	–	a	warrior	people	with	a	heroic	code	of	honour,
never	retreating	and	never	surrendering.’
Babur	paused	again.	‘Reports	have	kept	reaching	me	over	the	past	few	weeks	of	the	boasting	of	Rana
Sanga,	 the	 ruler	 of	 Mewar,	 the	 strongest	 and	 most	 wealthy	 of	 the	 Rajput	 kingdoms,	 that	 he	 will	 rid
Hindustan	of	us,	the	upstart	invaders,	and	put	a	true	Hindu	–	himself,	of	course	–	on	the	throne	for	the	first
time	in	three	hundred	years.’
‘Will	the	rest	of	the	Rajput	kingdoms	support	him?’
‘Probably	not.	They’re	a	jealous,	independent	lot,	as	touchy	of	their	honour,	as	suspicious	of	each	other
and	as	quick	to	pick	a	fight	as	some	of	our	own	Afghan	chiefs.	The	other	Rajput	rulers	won’t	want	to	see
him	even	more	powerful.’
‘How	much	trouble	could	he	make	on	his	own?’
‘Plenty.	He	has	a	large,	loyal	and	well-trained	army.	Even	though	he’s	ageing,	he’s	still	a	good	tactician
and	a	great	warrior,	who	prides	himself	on	always	leading	the	charge	himself.	He	also	makes	a	virtue	of
the	number	of	times	he’s	been	wounded	and	lost	parts	of	his	body.	I	hear	that	his	court	poet	brags	on	his

behalf	 that	 he	 is	 “a	 mere	 fragment	 of	 a	 man	 but	 what	 a	 fragment”.	 He	 lost	 one	 eye	 in	 a	 fight	 with	 his
brother,	his	arm	in	a	battle	against	Sultan	Ibrahim,	and	he	limps	from	a	severe	leg	wound.	He	has	eighty
wounds	 scattered	 across	 what	 remains	 of	 his	 scrawny	 body	 and	 his	 poet	 claims	 the	 randy	 old	 goat	 has
fathered	a	son	for	each	of	them.’
‘I’d	heard	that	too.	He	must	have	plenty	of	wives	–	and	clearly	at	least	one	part	of	his	anatomy	remains
intact.	How	long	can	we	leave	him	to	posture	without	confronting	him?’
‘That’s	the	very	question	I’ve	been	turning	over	in	my	mind.	It’s	only	nine	months	since	we	defeated
Ibrahim.	Our	grip	on	our	conquest	is	not	yet	secure	and	the	future	of	our	dynasty	here	in	Hindustan	hangs
in	the	balance.	I	would	like	to	think	that	you,	your	brothers	and	your	children	will	enjoy	these	gardens.
Only	this	morning	I	learned	that	Rana	Sanga	has	made	another	incursion	into	our	territory	on	the	pretext	of
chasing	rebels.	Admittedly	it	lasted	only	a	week	but	he	penetrated	deeper	than	before	.	.	.’
‘We	can’t	let	him	ride	into	our	domains	whenever	he	wishes.	If	we	let	him	continue	to	treat	them	pretty
much	as	his	own	it	will	be	seen	as	weakness	–	and	rightly	so.	He	needs	teaching	respect	now.’
‘I’m	losing	your	youthful	ardour	for	war,	but	you	are	right.	We’re	going	to	have	to	fight	him	some	time
and	better	to	do	it	sooner	than	later	to	safeguard	our	martial	reputation	and,	more	importantly,	while	we’re
still	 the	 only	 people	 in	 Hindustan	 with	 cannons	 and	 muskets.	 At	 least	 another	 campaign	 will	 curb	 any
restlessness	among	our	own	young	bloods.	The	prospect	of	battle	and	plunder	will	give	them	something	to
think	about.	I	will	call	a	military	council	for	tomorrow	to	begin	our	preparations	.	.	.’

Babur	turned	in	his	saddle.	Humayun	was	quite	close	behind	but	his	bodyguard	was	strung	out	some	way
further	 back.	 He	 was	 hot	 and	 sweating,	 and	 dust	 had	 stuck	 to	 every	 inch	 of	 his	 exposed	 flesh,	 crusting
around	his	eyes,	but	he	was	delighted	that	at	forty-four	he	had	ridden	a	hundred	and	fifty	miles	in	two	and
a	half	days	and	had	still	been	able	to	out-gallop	his	men	to	this	hilltop	vantage-point.
The	rocky	outcrop	gave	a	fine	view	over	the	dry	deserts	of	Rajasthan,	but	there	was	little	enough	else
to	be	pleased	about.	He	had	ridden	the	hundred	and	fifty	miles	in	pursuit	of	Rana	Sanga	but	he	and	his	men
had	not	even	come	in	sight	of	the	rana’s	main	army,	not	even	a	glimpse	of	their	dust	on	the	horizon.	He	had
been	on	campaign	for	the	last	six	weeks	but	during	that	time	had	been	unable	to	bring	 his	 enemy	 into	 a
pitched	battle	in	which	his	muskets	and	cannon	–	including	one	he	had	had	newly	cast	which	could	throw
a	ball	over	three-quarters	of	a	mile	–	could	be	deployed	to	good	effect.
The	wily	rana	had	wisely	preferred	a	war	of	movement,	using	his	more	mobile	forces	to	make	hit-andrun	 raids	 on	 Babur’s	 forts	 and	 supply	 caravans,	 just	 as	 Babur	 had	 once	 done	 from	 the	 hills	 above
Ferghana	 against	 his	 half-brother	 Jahangir’s	 men.	 The	 raids	 had	 weakened	 the	 morale	 of	 Babur’s
battalions,	leaving	them	edgy	and	always	on	the	lookout	for	attack.	The	raids	had	also	forced	Babur	to
detach	more	and	more	of	his	best	troops	from	his	main	force	to	guard	the	baggage	train.
Humayun	was	at	his	side	now.	‘I	can	still	outride	you	just	as	I	could	when	you	had	the	little	white	pony
ten	years	ago	.	.	.’
‘You	 have	 the	 best	 horse	 and	 there’d	 be	 a	 different	 result	 if	 we	 were	 on	 foot,’	 responded	 Humayun,
provoked	almost	despite	himself	into	adolescent	competition	with	his	father	and	an	adolescent	touchiness
about	any	perceived	failure.
‘I	was	only	joking.	Anyway,	neither	of	us	seems	able	to	catch	the	rana	and	he’s	older	than	both	of	us
and	crippled.	The	plain	out	there	is	deserted.	We	need	to	think	again.	Let’s	dine	alone	so	that	we	can	talk
frankly.’

The	two	servants	dressed	in	white	tunics	and	baggy	trousers	disappeared	through	the	tent	flaps	carrying
the	remains	of	the	last	course	of	the	dinner	–	oranges,	nuts	and	sticky	sweetmeats.	Babur	and	Humayun	lay
back	from	the	low	table	against	the	large	purple	cushions	embroidered	with	elephants	and	peacocks	that
had	once	graced	Ibrahim’s	palace	in	Delhi.	Each	had	a	gold	goblet	of	red	wine,	newly	arrived	from	the
vineyards	of	Ghazni,	south	of	Kabul.
‘I’ve	been	thinking	how	we	can	entice	Rana	Sanga	into	conflict.’	Humayun	put	his	goblet	down.	‘We
both	know	that,	for	the	Rajputs,	honour	–	their	personal	honour,	their	family	honour	–	is	everything.	We
should	 occupy	 a	 place	 of	 particular	 importance	 to	 the	 rana	 so	 that	 he	 will	 believe	 his	 honour	 has	 been
impaired	if	he	doesn’t	re-capture	it	quickly.’
‘A	good	idea	in	principle	but	have	you	actually	got	anywhere	in	mind?’
‘I	asked	some	of	the	native	chiefs	we	number	among	our	allies.	They	tell	me	that	Sanga’s	mother	was
born	 in	 a	 small	 village	 called	 Khanua	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 his	 territories	 twenty	 miles	 north-west	 of	 Agra	 –
about	seventy-five	miles	south-west	of	here.	He	built	a	shrine	there	to	one	of	his	gods	in	her	honour	and
still	worships	there	once	a	year.’
‘You’ve	 certainly	 done	 some	 thinking.	 I’ll	 send	 scouts	 first	 thing	 in	 the	 morning	 to	 check	 the	 terrain
between	Khanua	and	here	and	also	to	see	whether	the	place	itself	looks	a	good	one	for	us	to	fight.	If	all
goes	well,	I	should	be	able	to	order	our	forces	to	concentrate	there	within	a	few	days.	But	you’re	not	the
only	 one	 who’s	 been	 thinking.	 I’ve	 been	 worrying	 about	 how	 to	 hearten	 those	 of	 our	 men	 unsettled	 by
Sanga’s	success	in	his	hit-and-run	raids.’
‘Where	have	your	thoughts	led	you?’
‘Perhaps	in	a	strange	direction.	All	of	my	previous	campaigns	have	been	against	armies	that	included	at
least	some	men	who	shared	our	faith.	This	time	our	opponents	are	all	Hindus	–	that	is	to	say,	infidels.	We
will	declare	holy	war	–	jihad.’
‘But	now	we’re	in	Hindustan,	some	of	our	allies	among	the	local	rulers	are	Hindus,	too.’
‘We’ll	 make	 sure	 we	 detach	 them	 from	 the	 main	 army	 for	 this	 battle.	 In	 any	 case,	 I’ve	 been	 worried
about	the	loyalty	–	or,	at	least,	the	effectiveness	–	of	some	of	them	for	a	while	now.	They	can	garrison	rear
areas	or	some	such.’
‘It	may	work.’
‘It	will	work	.	.	.	I’ve	even	thought	of	how	to	symbolise	this	change.	This	fine	red	wine	of	Ghazni	I’ve
drunk	tonight	will	be	the	last	alcohol	I	shall	taste.	I’ll	pour	the	remainder	of	the	shipment	away	in	front	of
our	men	when	I	tell	them	of	the	jihad.’
‘But	you’ve	drunk	all	my	life	.	.	.’
‘Yes	and	I’ve	enjoyed	spirits,	bhang	and	the	fruit	of	the	opium	poppy,	I	know.	We	people	of	Timur’s
blood	–	and	of	Genghis’s	–	have	taken	strong	drink	since	long	before	the	mullahs	brought	the	true	religion
to	us.	Fermented	mare’s	milk	–	kvass	–	was,	after	all,	what	kept	Genghis’s	people	alive	in	the	winter	cold
on	 the	 high	 steppes.	 All	 but	 the	 strictest	 mullahs	 realised	 it	 would	 be	 impossible	 to	 change	 people
completely	and	at	once.	They	lauded	abstinence	as	the	ideal	and	helped	the	pious	and	ascetic	to	achieve	it
but	tolerated	drinking	among	men	of	the	world.	They	encouraged	us	to	forswear	it	for	short	periods	–	such
as	during	our	holy	month	of	Ramadan	and	as	we	became	older	and	could	sooner	expect	to	be	called	to
account	by	our	creator.’
Babur	took	another	sip.	‘Yes,	wine	is	good	and	I’m	known	to	enjoy	it.	That’s	why	my	renouncing	it	will
have	a	big	impact	on	morale.	That’s	why	I’m	expecting	you	to	renounce	it	too.’

Humayun	grimaced.
‘You	must	–	at	least	for	a	while	.	.	.	I’ll	make	the	announcement	to	our	troops	in	a	couple	of	days	or	so
when	I’ve	had	a	chance	to	tell	the	mullahs	and	detach	our	Hindu	allies	to	other	tasks.’

Babur’s	army	was	drawn	up	in	a	hollow	square	at	the	centre	of	which	was	a	raised	wooden	dais,	covered
with	gold	cloth,	on	which	their	emperor	stood	in	his	green	robes.	His	belt	was	of	intertwined	pearls	and
round	his	neck	he	wore	a	gorget	of	uncut	rubies	and	emeralds.	His	gold	crown	was	on	his	head	and	his
sword,	 Alamgir,	 was	 at	 his	 side.	 Next	 to	 him,	 Humayun	 was	 similarly	 royally	 attired,	 and	 they	 were
surrounded	by	their	senior	mullahs,	all	in	black	and	each	with	the	Holy	Book	in	his	right	hand.
Babur	began	to	speak:	‘Men,	we	march	tomorrow	for	what	I	intend	to	be	our	climactic	confrontation
with	this	upstart	Rana	of	Mewar,	who	dares	invade	our	territories.	He	is	not	a	man	of	our	religion.	He
does	not	follow	the	one	true	God	but	worships	many.	He	mistakenly	believes	he	will	be	reincarnated	on
earth	 many	 times.	 That	 may	 be	 what	 makes	 him	 so	 reckless.	 We	 must	 show	 him	 the	 superiority	 of	 our
religion	and	of	our	courage.	We	are	not	afraid	to	lose	our	one	life	because	we	are	certain	of	Paradise	if
we	fall	martyrs	in	our	battle	against	the	infidel.	I	have	consulted	our	mullahs,	these	wise	and	holy	men	you
see	around	me.	They	have	agreed	that	because	we	fight	against	infidels,	to	demonstrate	the	superiority	of
our	divinely	inspired	courage,	we	should	declare	this	a	jihad,	a	holy	war.	We	fight	for	our	God,	for	our
beliefs.	We	will	conquer	in	their	name.	Allah	akbar!	God	is	great!’
A	 loud	 cry	 of	 approval	 went	 up	 from	 the	 army’s	 front	 ranks,	 spreading	 and	 growing	 in	 volume	 and
fervour	as	it	was	relayed	to	the	outermost.	Soldiers	raised	their	swords	and	banged	their	shields.
After	 a	 few	 minutes,	 Babur	 lowered	 his	 hands	 repeatedly,	 palms	 down,	 to	 signify	 he	 wanted	 silence
once	more.	As	the	crowd	hushed	he	spoke	again:	‘You	know	me	as	a	man	who	has	not	always	succeeded
in	 following	 all	 of	 God’s	 teaching.	 Weak,	 as	 we	 all	 are,	 I	 have	 indulged	 my	 senses.	 You	 know	 I	 have
enjoyed	alcohol.	You	may	have	heard	of	the	wine	of	Ghazni	–	the	finest	of	the	year’s	crop	–	that	I	had
shipped	down	the	Khyber	Pass	only	a	week	ago	to	indulge	myself.	To	show	my	passion	for	our	holy	war	I
now	 renounce	 alcohol	 and	 so	 does	 my	 son,	 Humayun.	 To	 symbolise	 this,	 we	 will	 pour	 away	 the	 fine
Ghazni	wine	I	imported	into	Hindustan	with	such	effort.’
As	he	spoke,	he	and	Humayun	both	raised	axes	above	their	heads	and	brought	them	crashing	down	on
the	wooden	barrels	of	wine	that	had	been	placed	before	the	dais,	smashing	them	open	so	that	the	ruby-red
wine	 flowed	 out	 to	 soak	 into	 the	 dust.	 The	 roar	 that	 followed	 was	 even	 greater	 than	 the	 first.	 Babur’s
nobles	and	generals,	as	well	as	many	of	the	common	soldiers,	vied	with	each	other	to	shout	that	they,	too,
wished	to	reform	and	renounce	intoxicants	.	.	.	that,	purified	and	renewed,	they	would	conquer	.	.	.

Babur	stood	at	the	top	of	a	low	hill	overlooking	the	red	sand	of	the	Rajasthan	desert	at	Khanua.	Behind
him	 was	 the	 village	 itself,	 mainly	 mud-brick	 houses	 but,	 at	 its	 centre,	 the	 intricately	 carved	 sandstone
Hindu	temple	raised	by	Rana	Sanga	in	memory	of	his	mother.	Babur	had	made	the	shaven-headed,	whiterobed	priests	watch	while	his	men	defaced	or	chiselled	out	all	references	to	the	rana	or	his	mother	on	the
temple.	Then	he	had	expelled	the	priests	from	the	village,	knowing	they	would	take	the	news	to	the	rana.
Predictably,	 Rana	 Sanga’s	 Rajput	 honour	 had	 been	 unable	 to	 stomach	 the	 insult	 and	 he	 was	 now
encamped	about	three	miles	away	on	the	plain	below.	Although	his	camp	was	shrouded	in	early-morning

mist,	 only	 a	 few	 minutes	 ago	 scouts	 despatched	 before	 dawn	 had	 reported	 back	 to	 Babur	 that	 they	 had
heard	 and	 seen	 the	 unmistakable	 sights	 and	 sounds	 of	 preparation	 for	 battle	 –	 cooking	 fires	 doused,
swords	sharpened,	horses	saddled	and	orders	shouted.
Babur’s	own	deployments	had	been	agreed	a	few	days	previously	–	immediately	after	the	arrival	of	his
army	at	Khanua	–	in	the	familiar	surroundings	of	his	scarlet	tent.
‘I	believe	we	should	follow	basically	the	same	battle	plan	as	at	Panipat,’	he	had	begun,	‘but	we	should
use	the	hill	to	strengthen	our	position	further.	Let	us	place	the	cannon	on	the	hilltop	and	dig	trenches	and
build	ramparts	around	the	hill	to	protect	them.’
Then	 one	 of	 Babur’s	 longest	 serving	 commanders,	 the	 usually	 taciturn	 Hassan	 Hizari,	 a	 Tajik	 from
Badakhshan	who	had	been	with	him	for	more	than	twenty	years,	had	spoken.	‘That	is	well,	Majesty,	but
Sanga	 has	 fewer	 than	 two	 hundred	 elephants	 and	 relies	 mainly	 on	 his	 cavalry.	 Our	 perimeter	 will	 be
longer	than	at	Panipat.	Horses	are	much	nimbler	than	the	lumbering	elephants,	if	less	frightening.	Even	if
the	 Rajputs	 lose	 some	 of	 their	 cavalry	 to	 cannon	 shot,	 it	 won’t	 deter	 them.	 Many	 will	 simply	 jump	 the
ditches	and	barricades.	We	must	be	ready	for	at	least	some	to	penetrate	our	perimeter.’
‘You’re	 right,	 of	 course.	 We’ll	 need	 to	 station	 archers	 and	 musketeers	 as	 a	 further	 line	 of	 defence
halfway	up	the	hill.’
‘	We	will	need	cavalry	up	there,	too,	to	rush	to	any	breach,’	Humayun	had	added.	‘Let	me	take	charge
of	them.’	Babur	had	not	had	the	heart	to	deny	him.
Over	 the	 past	 few	 days	 Babur’s	 troops	 had	 put	 the	 plans	 into	 practice,	 digging	 earthworks	 and
positioning	cannon	with	the	help	of	oxen.	They	had	even	made	some	of	the	wagons	into	a	kind	of	movable
barricade	by	encasing	their	sides	and	wheels	in	thick	planks.
When	Humayun	had	reviewed	the	dispositions	with	Babur	only	a	few	minutes	earlier	they	had	found
need	for	only	the	most	minor	adjustments.	After	embracing	his	father,	Humayun	had	departed	to	take	up	his
position	with	his	cavalry	detachments	a	little	further	down	the	hill.	Left	alone	on	the	hilltop	Babur	prayed
for	Humayun’s	safety	in	the	coming	battle.	Despite	his	son’s	protests,	he	had	ensured	that	the	young	man
had	a	strong	bodyguard	–	forty	men	from	Hassan	Hizari’s	Tajiks.	He	could	do	no	more	but	still	he	was
anxious	–	the	memory	of	Baburi’s	hand	trailing	in	the	dust	after	Panipat	remained	vivid	.	.	.
By	now	the	mist	was	beginning	to	lift	and	Babur	could	see	that	the	Rajputs	were	deploying	fully.	There
were	rank	after	rank	of	horsemen.	Babur’s	spies	had	estimated	that	the	rana’s	forces	outnumbered	his	own
by	at	least	four	to	one.
Suddenly	a	tall	Rajput	galloped	towards	Babur’s	lines.	He	was	dressed	all	in	orange,	his	saddle	and
bridle	 ornamented	 with	 tassels	 of	 the	 same	 colour.	 His	 white	 horse’s	 head	 was	 protected	 by	 a	 steel
headguard	that	glinted	in	the	morning	light.	He	wheeled	his	horse	within	just	a	hundred	yards	of	Babur’s
defences	to	shout	what	sounded	like	a	herald’s	challenge.	Babur’s	response	was	to	send	an	order	to	his
matchlock	men	to	shoot	the	herald	down.	They	obeyed.	The	man	fell	from	his	horse,	but	his	foot	caught	in
the	 stirrup	 and	 the	 animal	 bolted	 back	 towards	 the	 Rajput	 lines	 dragging	 its	 rider	 along,	 his	 orangeturbaned	head	quickly	reduced	to	bloody	pulp	as	it	banged	along	the	rocky	ground.
Just	 as	 Babur	 had	 intended,	 his	 contempt	 for	 the	 traditional	 challenge	 goaded	 the	 Rajputs	 into	 a
headlong,	undisciplined	charge.	Their	horsemen	soon	outdistanced	the	hundred	or	so	armoured	elephants
Rana	Sanga	had	deployed.	Babur	lowered	his	sword	as	a	sign	to	his	artillerymen,	musketeers	and	archers
to	fire	as	soon	as	their	enemy	was	in	range.	From	his	position	on	the	hill,	the	Rajputs	seemed	like	a	great
wave	 rushing	 forward	 to	 engulf	 his	 perimeter.	 Often	 a	 man	 or	 a	 horse	 fell.	 Sometimes	 a	 cannon	 ball
stopped	 an	 elephant	 in	 its	 seemingly	 ambling	 but	 actually	 speedy	 run.	 But	 nothing	 stopped	 the	 onward
charge,	until	it	crashed	around	the	trenches	and	barricades	from	behind	which	Babur’s	archers	were	firing
as	fast	as	they	could	draw	arrows	from	their	quivers.

Babur	could	see	the	flashes	as	the	musketeers	discharged	their	weapons	further	up	the	hill	and,	nearer
still,	acrid	white	smoke	billowing	from	the	cannons’	mouths.	Around	the	western	side	of	his	perimeter,
Babur	saw	the	wave	of	Rajput	horsemen	break	and	dissipate	their	force	and	after	swirling	around	in	front
of	 the	 barricades	 pull	 back	 to	 regroup.	 However,	 to	 the	 east,	 a	 number	 of	 Rajputs	 who	 had	 jumped	 the
earth	ramparts	and	kicked	their	horses	on	up	the	hill	were	scattering	a	group	of	musketeers	and	archers.
Babur	saw	several	slashed	down	by	the	Rajputs	who	then	turned	their	mounts	towards	the	cannon.
Immediately,	Babur	signalled	to	Humayun	that	his	cavalry	must	charge.	Humayun,	his	Tajik	bodyguard
around	him,	led	them	pell-mell	down	the	hill	to	crash	into	the	Rajputs.	Several	Rajputs	fell,	their	horses
knocked	 over	 by	 the	 sheer	 weight	 and	 speed	 of	 Humayun’s	 charge.	 Others	 were	 still	 fighting	 and	 more
were	joining	them	by	jumping	the	barricades	from	which	the	defenders	had	retreated.	Humayun	seemed	to
be	fighting	well	but	through	the	drifting	smoke	Babur	saw	that	the	Rajputs	were	pressing	round	him.	Then
the	smoke	enveloped	him	and	his	bodyguards	completely.
To	Babur	it	seemed	an	age	before	the	smoke	cleared	again.	But	it	was	in	fact	only	a	short	time	before
he	 could	 make	 out	 that	 the	 Rajputs	 were	 now	 turning	 back	 down	 the	 hill	 and	 the	 few	 survivors	 were
retreating	back	beyond	the	barricades.	Five	minutes	later	Humayun	rode	up.
‘There	was	so	much	smoke	I	couldn’t	see	what	happened	properly.’
‘Our	first	charge	knocked	them	back	a	little	but	they	regrouped	and,	seeing	I	was	the	leader,	tried	to	cut
me	out	from	the	rest.’
‘That	much	I	saw.’
‘Well,	my	brave	bodyguard	held	them	off	and	I	decided	to	repay	the	Rajputs	in	kind.	We	broke	out	of
the	heaving	mêlée	and	charged	one	of	their	officers	–	a	great	black-bearded	man	with	peacock	feathers	in
his	 turban.	 I	 got	 in	 the	 first	 and	 only	 blow,	 slashing	 him	 across	 the	 face	 and	 neck,	 and	 down	 he	 went,
backwards	out	of	the	saddle	on	to	the	rocky	ground,	to	lie	motionless.	His	men	seemed	to	lose	heart	and
we	pushed	them	back,	helped	by	the	surviving	musketeers	who	had	taken	up	new	positions	on	the	flanks.
Soon	our	perimeter	was	secure	again	and	the	front-line	barricades	were	remanned.’
‘You	did	well.’
‘Shouldn’t	we	follow	up	and	attack	them?’
‘Not	 yet.	 Neither	 their	 strength	 nor	 their	 will	 is	 exhausted.	 See?	 They’re	 massing	 for	 another	 attack.
Tell	the	bearers	to	get	water-bottles	and	new	supplies	of	arrows	to	our	men.	The	fight	is	not	yet	over.’
Babur	was	proved	right.	The	Rajputs	continued	to	make	periodic	attacks	throughout	the	heat	of	the	day.
Each	time	they	were	repulsed	without	breaking	the	perimeter,	leaving	wounded	or	dying	men	and	horses
piled	around	the	barricades.	Babur	saw	one	wounded	Rajput	half	walking,	half	crawling	back	towards	the
Rajput	 lines.	 Slowly	 and	 agonisingly,	 he	 made	 about	 seven	 hundred	 yards	 when	 a	 new	 Rajput	 cavalry
charge	 rode	 over	 him	 and	 his	 body	 was	 crushed	 and	 spreadeagled	 in	 the	 stony	 desert	 dust.	 His	 turban,
half-unwound	and	occasionally	caught	by	a	breeze,	was	the	only	movement	from	the	corpse.
The	 sun	 was	 low	 in	 the	 sky	 when	 Humayun,	 at	 his	 father’s	 side,	 pointed	 towards	 yet	 another
regrouping.	‘They	seem	to	be	massing	again.	There	are	elephants	and	cavalry	as	before,	but	in	the	middle
there’s	a	large	number	of	men	on	foot.	Something	we’ve	not	seen	before	–	and	there	seem	more	of	them
than	ever.	It’s	as	if	their	camp-followers	and	servants	have	joined	the	front	line.’
‘They	probably	have.	I’ve	heard	that	even	the	humblest	water-carrier	prefers	to	sacrifice	his	life	in	one
last	 charge	 than	 to	 return	 home	 in	 defeat.	 They	 call	 these	 charges	 jauhur.	 Beforehand	 they	 pray	 and
sacrifice	to	their	gods	to	stiffen	their	resolve.’
‘One	of	our	Hindustani	allies	told	me	they	also	chew	opium	pellets	to	deaden	the	fear	as	well	as	the
pain	of	any	wounds	.	.	.’
‘No	doubt.	Here	they	come	again	.	.	.’

The	 blare	 of	 trumpets,	 the	 mesmeric	 tattoo	 of	 drums	 and	 the	 clash	 of	 cymbals	 grew	 louder	 as	 the
Rajputs	advanced,	moving	more	slowly	this	time	because	so	many	were	on	foot.
‘Tell	my	groom	to	ready	my	horse,’	Babur	shouted	to	Humayun.	‘I	will	lead	the	charge	when	the	time
comes.’
‘I’ll	be	with	you.’
‘But	first	pass	the	word	to	our	drummers	to	out-sound	the	Rajputs,	and	tell	our	officers	that	each	time
the	Rajputs	give	their	war-cry,	our	men	should	reply,	“Allah	akbar”	–	it	will	hearten	them.’
On	came	the	ragged	line	of	Rajputs.	Babur’s	artillery	despatched	cannon	balls	into	them,	knocking	men
over.	Musketeers	and	archers	emptied	saddles.	Sometimes	an	elephant	would	lurch	and	fall	or	–	wounded
and	in	panic	–	turn	to	the	rear,	scattering	those	around	it.	Still	the	Rajput	drummers	kept	up	their	hypnotic
beat.	 Gaps	 in	 the	 lines	 of	 men	 were	 filled.	 To	 Babur,	 the	 noise	 of	 drums	 and	 trumpets	 and	 the	 mingled
cries	 of	 ‘Mewar’	 and	 ‘Allah	 akbar’,	 resounding	 in	 his	 head,	 seemed	 to	 drown	 the	 cannon	 shot	 and	 the
screams	of	the	wounded.
When	 they	 were	 about	 two	 hundred	 yards	 away	 from	 the	 barricades,	 the	 Rajput	 cavalry	 jabbed	 their
horses	into	action,	riding	over	the	bodies	of	the	dead	and	wounded	from	previous	attacks.	The	infantry
used	their	fallen	comrades	as	soft	stepping	stones	across	the	trenches	and	aids	to	climb	the	barricades.
All	along	the	perimeter	the	fighting	was	hand	to	hand,	personal	and	determined.	But	the	greatest	crush	was
directly	downhill	from	Babur	and	Humayun.
‘That	is	where	we	aim	our	charge.’	Drawing	Alamgir,	Babur	ordered	his	cavalry	to	attack	once	more,
then	led	them	at	a	gallop	down	the	hill	through	the	remaining	barricades	and	into	the	fray.	Again,	the	shock
of	their	downhill	charge	hurled	the	Rajputs	back,	their	horses	rearing	and	trampling	foot-soldiers.	As	he
rode	on,	Babur	saw	a	Rajput	archer	aim	at	him,	and	before	he	could	reach	him	to	cut	him	down,	the	arrow
had	thudded	into	the	leather	pommel	of	his	saddle.	Babur	slashed	at	the	archer’s	unprotected	body	–	few
Rajputs	deigned	to	wear	chain-mail	even	if	they	could	afford	it	–	and	he	fell	beneath	Babur’s	horse.
Once	through	the	mass	of	Rajputs,	Babur	wheeled	his	horse	and	waited	while	his	men	and	Humayun,
who	 to	 Babur’s	 consternation	 had	 lost	 his	 helmet,	 re-formed	 around	 him.	 Then	 they	 charged	 into	 the
Rajputs	again,	this	time	from	the	rear.	Although	they	fought	bravely,	the	orange-clad	Rajputs	were	soon
surrounded,	separated	into	isolated	groups	and	beginning	to	be	overwhelmed.	When	one	band	of	five	men
was	 given	 the	 chance	 to	 surrender,	 they	 embraced	 then	 plunged	 their	 swords	 into	 each	 other.	 But
everywhere	the	clamour	of	battle	was	lessening.	Babur	realised	victory	was	his.
Then	 he	 noticed	 that,	 a	 hundred	 yards	 to	 his	 right,	 Humayun	 was	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 three	 of	 his
bodyguards	 were	 cutting	 his	 garments	 from	 his	 lower	 body.	 Paternal	 anxiety	 overwhelmed	 the	 joy	 of
victory	as	he	rode	over.	With	intense	relief	he	saw	that	Humayun	was	conscious,	though	grimacing	in	pain.
‘It’s	just	an	arrow	in	the	thigh	–	a	lucky	shot	from	way	over	there	as	the	Rajputs	were	retreating.’
The	arrow	still	protruding	from	his	son’s	leg	and	blood	was	seeping	from	around	the	metal	head,	only
half	of	which	had	embedded	itself	in	Humayun.	‘It	seems	not	to	have	penetrated	too	far.	All	the	same	it
needs	to	come	out	at	once	–	I	know	from	years	of	battle.	I	will	hold	my	son’s	shoulders,’	Babur	said	to	the
bodyguards.	‘One	of	you	hold	his	ankles.	The	strongest	of	you	draw	it	out.	It’s	very	important	you	pull
straight	–	no	twisting.	Humayun,	keep	still!’
Babur	 gripped	 his	 son’s	 shoulders.	 Instantly,	 one	 of	 his	 bodyguards	 grabbed	 Humayun’s	 feet	 and
another	 stooped,	 gripped	 the	 arrow	 shaft	 in	 both	 hands	 and,	 in	 a	 single	 movement,	 pulled	 it	 out.	 Blood
spurted	but	soon	subsided.
‘Bind	a	pad	of	cloth	tightly	over	it.	Praise	God,	he	will	live	to	share	in	our	victory.	Prepare	a	litter	to
carry	him	to	his	tent.’
‘No,	 Father.	 I	 will	 ride	 with	 you	 to	 review	 our	 troops	 once	 I	 am	 bandaged	 and	 dressed	 in	 clean

clothes.’
Half	an	hour	later,	Babur	and	Humayun	rode	around	the	battlefield	in	the	dusk.	By	the	light	of	flaring
torches,	Babur’s	stretcher-bearers	were	bending	over	the	bodies	of	his	men,	separating	the	living	from	the
dead.	Camp-followers	and	scavengers	scuttled	around	the	field	under	cover	of	the	gloom	to	pick	over	the
Rajput	 dead	 for	 objects	 of	 value,	 roughly	 pulling	 aside	 bodies	 and	 brawling	 over	 the	 richest-looking
corpses.	They	disappeared	into	the	darkness	as	Babur,	Humayun	and	their	entourage	approached	closer.
Father	and	son	were	quiet	as	they	reached	the	tents	to	which	their	wounded	were	being	brought.	Some
men	were	lying	still	and	quiet,	some	trying	to	drive	away	the	black	flies	crawling	across	their	bodies	and
clustering	on	their	wounds,	some	screaming	out	in	pain,	others	biting	the	backs	of	their	hands	to	prevent
themselves	from	doing	so	and	yet	others	begging	for	help.
‘So	it’s	true,	Father,	as	you	once	said,	that	the	badly	wounded	cry	either	for	their	mothers	or	for	God.’
‘Their	mothers	have	been	their	greatest	and	most	unquestioning	comfort	in	this	world,	and	God	is	their
greatest	 hope	 for	 the	 next.’	 Babur	 paused,	 then	 continued,	 ‘We	 must	 give	 thanks	 that	 the	 bravery	 and
sacrifice	of	these	men	have	made	us	undisputed	masters	of	Hindustan.	We	must	repay	them	by	seeing	that
the	families	of	the	fallen	are	cared	for	and	those	who	survive	compensated.	Above	all,	we	owe	it	to	them
and	 to	 ourselves	 not	 to	 squander	 the	 results	 of	 their	 sacrifice.	 Nevertheless,	 we	 should	 not	 dwell	 on
sacrifice	and	death.	Both	–	whether	of	the	rulers	or	the	ruled	–	are	essential	to	all	empires.	To	become
overly	concerned	about	them	is	to	grow	weak	and	indecisive.	Tonight	we	should	rejoice	in	our	victory.
We	have	vanquished	our	greatest	enemy.	When	they	hear	of	his	utter	defeat,	other	rulers	will	not	dare	to
attack	us.	We	have	secured	a	bright	future	for	our	dynasty.’

In	the	late	afternoon	of	the	next	day	as	shadows	were	lengthening,	Babur	once	more	addressed	his	troops,
assembled	around	him.	Many	were	bandaged	and	some	supported	themselves	on	crutches.
‘Men,	let	us	rejoice	and	give	thanks	to	God	for	the	great	victory	you	have	won	by	your	courage	and
belief	in	our	righteous	cause.	We	have	shown	ourselves	once	more	worthy	successors	to	the	noble	Timur
and	history	will	remember	us	as	such.	We	celebrated	last	night	and	when	we	are	back	in	Agra,	which	lies
scarcely	four	days’	march	away,	I	will	again	break	open	my	treasuries	and	reward	each	and	every	one	of
you.
‘Last	 night	 I	 learned	 from	 a	 prisoner	 that	 late	 in	 the	 battle	 Rana	 Sanga	 –	 our	 insolent	 opponent	 who
dared	set	his	power	against	ours	–	was	wounded	in	the	abdomen	so	badly	that	he	had	to	be	carried	from
the	field	in	a	litter	slung	between	four	horses.	Today,	scouts	checking	that	the	Rajputs	were	not	regrouping
came	in	sight	of	a	great	funeral	pyre	being	built	ten	miles	west	of	here.	A	peasant	working	in	the	fields
told	 them	 it	 was	 for	 Rana	 Sanga,	 who	 had	 died	 nearby,	 and	 that	 those	 building	 it	 were	 the	 surviving
members	of	his	bodyguard.	Our	scouts	hid	in	tall	crops	nearby	until	they	saw	it	was	indeed	his	body	that
was	placed	on	the	pyre.	They	rode	away	only	after	they	had	witnessed	the	torch	applied	to	the	base	of	the
brushwood.	Looking	back,	they	saw	orange	flames	flare	to	the	sky.	The	rana	did	not	live	to	boast	of	his
eighty-first	 wound.	 The	 flames	 consumed	 not	 only	 him	 but	 Rajput	 ambitions	 to	 deprive	 us	 of	 our	 new
lands.
‘To	ensure	any	surviving	rebels	or	others	who	wish	ill	to	our	empire	understand	the	futility	of	opposing
us,	we	will	again	follow	the	custom	of	Timur.	I	have	ordered	the	corpses	of	our	enemies	to	be	decapitated
and	the	heads	collected	to	be	piled	in	towers	at	every	crossroad	from	here	to	Agra.	Let	the	hopes	of	our
enemies	rot	with	them.’

That	evening	Humayun	made	his	way	to	the	part	of	his	father’s	vast	scarlet	campaign	tent	that	contained
his	private	quarters.	His	mind	was	buzzing	with	images	of	battle	and	his	ambitions	for	his	own	place	in
the	 new	 empire.	 He	 must	 be	 his	 father’s	 heir.	 After	 all,	 he	 was	 his	 eldest	 son	 –	 even	 though	 under	 the
traditions	of	Timur	and	his	descendants	the	eldest	did	not	succeed	by	right	–	and	also	the	son	of	Babur’s
favourite	 wife.	 Now	 he	 had	 proved	 himself	 in	 battle	 too.	 Perhaps	 he	 should	 broach	 the	 subject	 of
succession	with	his	father	now.	Or,	at	least,	seek	a	new	command	in	which	he	could	impress	further.
Pushing	aside	the	heavy	gold	curtains	which	shielded	his	father’s	quarters,	he	saw	Babur	stretched	out
on	a	low	divan	covered	with	gold-embroidered	cream	and	purple	cushions,	a	silver	pipe	at	his	side.	He
seemed	 neither	 to	 see	 nor	 hear	 Humayun	 enter	 but	 continued	 to	 gaze	 into	 the	 middle	 distance.	 Coming
closer,	Humayun	saw	that	his	father’s	expression	was	of	a	benign	content	and	that	the	pupils	of	his	green
eyes	were	dilated.	He	put	out	a	hand	and	shook	Babur	gently	by	the	shoulder.	His	eyelids	fluttered	briefly
and	his	eyes	began	to	focus.	‘Humayun,	when	did	you	come	in?’
‘Only	a	minute	or	two	ago.’
‘After	dinner,	I	took	a	pipe	of	bhang	and	opium,	which	seemed	to	transport	me	away	from	this	brownbaked	 land	 with	 its	 multitudes	 of	 people	 and	 all	 the	 cares	 of	 conquest.	 I	 was	 back	 on	 the	 hillsides	 of
Ferghana.	 The	 emerald	 grass	 was	 waving,	 dotted	 with	 the	 scarlet	 of	 tulips	 and	 the	 blue	 of	 irises.	 I
watched	the	waters	of	the	cascading	rivulets	sparkle	and	glisten	–	each	drop	holding	a	world	within	itself.
The	sound	of	the	soft	breezes	and	the	tinkling	of	water	filled	my	ears.	I	felt	the	lightness,	the	carelessness
of	a	young	man.	Peace	washed	over	me	and	took	away	my	worries	and	responsibilities.’	Babur	smiled	a
tranquil,	slightly	dazed	smile.	‘What	do	you	say?	Should	we	call	for	some	of	those	excellent	rosewaterflavoured	sweetmeats?’
Humayun	realised	it	was	no	time	to	talk	of	his	ambitions.	His	father	was	relaxing	into	some	of	his	old
distractions.	Perhaps	he	should,	too.	The	red	wines	of	Ghazni	were	good.	It	wouldn’t	be	long	before	he	at
least	would	be	drinking	them	again.	‘I	only	came	in	to	tell	you	that	the	preparations	are	well	under	way
for	the	beginning	of	our	march	back	to	Agra	tomorrow	and,	of	course,	to	say	good	night.’
As	he	made	his	way	back	to	his	own	tent,	Humayun	looked	up	into	a	night	sky	pricked	by	stars.	As	he
watched,	more	appeared,	patterning	the	heavens.	Suddenly	he	felt	impatient	with	the	clamour	of	the	camp,
noisy	 with	 men	 and	 animals,	 and	 the	 crackling	 of	 fires	 whose	 flames	 seemed	 crude	 compared	 with	 the
celestial	light	above.	He	called	for	his	horse,	mounted	and	rode	out	into	the	darkness	to	be	alone	with	his
thoughts	beneath	the	silent	stars.

	
	
	

Chapter	26
The	Bondage	of	Kingship
	

The	waters	of	the	Ganges	were	warm	and	Babur	swam	the	thirty-three	strokes	it	took	to	cross	the	river
with	pleasure.	It	felt	good	to	fulfil	the	final	part	of	his	vow,	made	six	years	ago	when,	with	Baburi,	he	had
plunged	into	the	icy	Indus	and	sworn	to	swim	every	major	river	of	his	new	empire.	Shaking	droplets	of
water	from	his	hair	and	eyes,	Babur	hauled	himself	out	on	to	the	bank	and	lay	down	in	the	sun.	On	the
opposite	bank,	the	bodyguards	and	huntsmen	who	had	ridden	with	him	from	his	nearby	camp	at	Kanauj,	a
hundred	and	fifty	miles	east	of	Agra,	waited	with	the	horses	in	the	pool	of	green	shade	beneath	a	leafy
neem	tree.	Tonight,	when	it	was	dark,	he	and	his	men	would	go	fishing,	holding	candles	just	above	the
surface	 of	 the	 water.	 For	 some	 reason	 the	 shimmering	 light	 was	 irresistible	 to	 fish,	 luring	 them	 to	 the
surface	where	their	silvery	bodies	were	easily	grabbed.
Babur	closed	his	eyes	and	contemplated	the	river.	According	to	the	scholars	he	had	ordered	to	draw
him	 maps	 of	 Hindustan,	 the	 Ganges	 flowed	 eastward,	 passing	 through	 Bengal	 to	 spill	 into	 a	 great	 blue
ocean.	 One	 day,	 Babur	 promised	 himself,	 he	 would	 see	 the	 great	 shining	 expanse	 of	 water	 he	 found	 so
hard	to	visualise	.	.	.	How	did	it	look,	the	horizon	where	the	water	met	the	sky?
He	 was	 still	 finding	 Hindustan	 a	 bewildering,	 surprising	 place.	 Compared	 to	 his	 homelands	 it	 was
indeed	 another	 world.	 Its	 mountains,	 rivers,	 forests	 and	 wildernesses,	 its	 villages	 and	 provinces,	 its
animals	 and	 plants,	 people	 and	 languages,	 even	 its	 rains	 and	 winds	 were	 altogether	 different	 .	 .	 .	 But
whereas	when	he	had	first	crossed	the	Indus	he	had	thought	Hindustan	alien,	even	oppressive,	now	he	was
starting	to	appreciate	it.	Since	defeating	Rana	Sanga	he	had	spent	much	of	his	time	on	the	move,	setting	up
vast	encampments,	cities	in	miniature,	with	his	own	red	tent	at	the	heart	–	just	as	Timur	had	once	made
tours	of	inspection	from	Samarkand.	His	journey	had	given	Babur	the	opportunity	to	show	himself	to	his
new	subjects	but	also	to	learn.
At	 night,	 he	 took	 increasing	 pleasure	 in	 writing	 his	 diary,	 documenting	 everything	 from	 how	 the
peasants	tended	their	fields	to	the	teams	of	deotis	who,	with	their	gourds	of	oil	and	thick	wicks	embedded
in	metal	tripods,	lit	the	streets	of	the	towns	and	villages.	He	tried	to	describe	creatures	new	to	him,	like
the	playful,	leaping	river	dolphins	with	bodies	shaped	like	waterskins,	and	the	lizard-like,	sharp-toothed
crocodiles.
Soon	he’d	return	to	Agra,	where	the	gardens	he	had	planted	were	flourishing	and	had	recently	yielded
the	 first	 grapes	 and	 melons	 grown	 by	 the	 gardeners	 he	 had	 summoned	 from	 Kabul.	 In	 addition,	 seven
hundred	Hindustani	stonemasons	were	at	work	on	the	mosque	he	had	commissioned	in	Agra	to	celebrate
his	crushing	of	Rana	Sanga.	With	its	high	recessed	arches	–	iwans	–	elegantly	tapering	minarets	and	relief
carvings	 of	 his	 favourite	 flowers	 –	 the	 Hindu	 craftsmen	 could	 fashion	 tulips	 and	 irises	 so	 lifelike	 they
seemed	to	toss	their	fragile	heads	in	the	breeze	–	it	would	be	a	fine	structure.	He	had	also	established	a
post	system	to	link	Agra	with	Kabul,	with	staging	points	every	eighteen	miles.	Teams	of	post	horses	and
riders	were	kept	in	constant	readiness	so	that	messages	could	be	swiftly	carried	between	Babur’s	capital
in	Hindustan	and	his	lands	beyond	the	Khyber	Pass.
Having	achieved	so	much,	it	was	satisfying	to	reread	some	of	the	early	passages	of	his	diary,	especially

his	despairing	laments	about	his	hopeless,	throneless	state	and	his	yearnings	for	Samarkand.	How	ironic
that	 he	 had	 not	 managed	 to	 hold	 Timur’s	 city	 long	 enough	 to	 create	 anything	 lasting	 whereas	 here,	 in
Hindustan,	he	was	building	something	permanent.	When,	eventually,	he	was	called	to	Paradise,	he	would,
God	willing,	leave	his	sons	a	rich	and	stable	empire.
Babur	sat	up	and	watched	the	river	flow	past.	A	bird’s	wing	flashed	emerald	in	the	sunlight	as	a	green
woodpecker	swooped	among	the	reeds.	What	about	his	sons?	With	Maham,	Gulrukh	and	Khanzada,	their
aunt,	 Kamran,	 Askari	 and	 Hindal	 had	 made	 the	 long	 journey	 south-east	 to	 Agra	 as	 soon	 as	 Babur	 had
thought	 it	 safe	 to	 send	 for	 them.	 He	 had	 marked	 their	 arrival	 with	 a	 grand	 ceremony,	 awarding	 his	 two
elder	 sons	 robes	 of	 honour,	 yak-tail	 standards,	 drums,	 fine	 horses,	 ten	 elephants	 apiece	 and	 strings	 of
camels	and	mules.
He	was	proud	of	them.	Khanzada	had	told	him	that	Kamran	–	now	twenty-one	and	sprouting	a	black
beard	–	had	heeded	her	advice	and	Baisanghar’s	and	had	done	well	as	regent	in	Kabul,	a	position	since
filled	by	Baisanghar.	Thirteen-year-old	Askari	was	also	showing	himself	able	and	ambitious.	And	why
not?	Babur	had	been	King	of	Ferghana	at	that	age.	Since	their	arrival	he’d	found	plenty	of	employment	for
them,	sending	them	on	tours	of	inspection	and	occasional	small	campaigns	to	quash	sporadic	resistance.
They	 should	 be	 content,	 but	 something	 in	 their	 manner	 towards	 Humayun	 –	 especially	 Kamran’s	 –
occasionally	 troubled	 Babur.	 They	 seemed	 resentful,	 even	 jealous.	 But	 it	 was	 healthy,	 he	 tried	 to	 tell
himself.	 After	 all,	 Humayun	 had	 been	 at	 Babur’s	 side	 throughout	 the	 conquest	 of	 Hindustan.	 It	 was
inevitable	that	he	and	Humayun	should	have	grown	close	and	equally	inevitable	that	Kamran,	so	near	in
age	to	Humayun,	should	feel	excluded.	Babur	had	talked	it	over	with	Khanzada,	whose	wise	advice	had
been	that	he	should	ask	Humayun	to	be	a	little	more	tactful	towards	his	brothers.
Maham,	too,	had	noticed	the	friction	but	she	blamed	Kamran	and	Askari’s	mother,	Gulrukh,	for	stirring
up	her	sons	against	her	own,	Humayun.	Maham’s	pleas	that	he	formally	declare	Humayun	his	heir	were
growing	more	persistent,	but	that	was	a	decision	only	he	could	take	–	and	only	when	he	was	ready.	The
king’s	right	to	choose	his	heir	from	among	his	sons	was	a	good	one	–	indeed,	in	the	old	days,	sons	had
been	 expected	 to	 compete	 with	 one	 another	 .	 .	 .	 Only	 the	 strongest	 deserved	 to	 rule	 because	 only	 the
strongest	 could	 protect	 the	 clans.	 Humayun	 was	 undoubtedly	 a	 good	 warrior	 but	 now,	 in	 addition	 to
fighting	 skills,	 a	 king	 needed	 other	 talents	 to	 win	 loyalty	 and	 make	 alliances.	 Babur	 must	 be	 absolutely
sure	before	making	any	final	decision.
At	least	ten-year-old	Hindal	did	not	seem	part	of	this	sibling	rivalry.	Maham	still	kept	him	close	to	her,
although	Babur	must	appoint	a	tutor	for	him.	Hindal’s	birth-mother,	Dildar,	had	not	come	to	Agra.	She	had
been	ill	and	had	remained	in	Kabul	with	Hindal’s	sister	Gulbadan.	When	she	was	recovered	Babur	would
send	for	them	and	his	entire	family	would	be	with	him,	which	was	as	it	should	be.
Babur	stood	up,	dived	in	again	and	cut	powerfully	through	the	water	of	the	Ganges	–	only	thirty	strokes
this	time	–	to	where	his	men	waited	patiently.

‘I	want	you	to	have	this.’	Babur	held	out	a	copy	of	his	diaries	bound	within	carved	ivory	covers.	‘It	is	the
account	of	my	life	that	I	have	kept	for	many	years	and	will	continue	to	keep.	I	ordered	my	scribe	to	copy
what	I	have	written	so	far	.	.	.’
Humayun	 took	 it,	 his	 brown	 eyes	 –	 so	 like	 Maham’s	 –	 widening	 in	 surprise.	 ‘It	 is	 a	 great	 honour,
Father.’
‘More	than	that,	I	hope.	I	want	you	to	learn	from	it.	You	have	known	campaigns	and	battles	but	never

what	I	went	through	.	.	.	I	became	a	king	at	not	much	more	than	half	your	age.	I	survived	only	because	of
the	loyalty	of	a	few	of	my	men,	the	determination	of	my	mother	and	grandmother	and	my	own	wits.	There
were	times	when	I	had	nothing	and	a	bowl	of	soup	brought	me	tears	of	happiness	.	.	.	They	were	bleak
days	but	they	toughened	me,	fitting	me	to	rule	an	empire	and	hardening	my	determination	that	I	would	win
one	.	.	.	You	have	grown	up	with	greater	security,	with	a	father	to	protect	you,	with	brothers	to	share	your
youth	.	.	.	You	should	value	that	.	.	.’
‘I	do,	Father.’	Humayun	seemed	puzzled.
Babur	looked	away.	This	was	hard.	He	was	proud	of	his	tall,	muscular,	athletic	son,	who	had	shown	so
much	bravery	and	resourcefulness.
‘You	behave	arrogantly	to	your	brothers.	Kamran	is	only	a	few	months	younger	than	you.	It	was	not	his
fault	that	he	took	no	part	in	the	conquest	of	Hindustan.	He	had	a	task	to	fulfil	in	Kabul	and	he	acquitted
himself	well	–	yet	you	lord	it	over	him.	You	treat	Askari	as	the	child	he	no	longer	is	and	he	resents	it.	A
little	rivalry	between	you	is	only	natural	but	you	should	be	more	sensitive	to	your	brothers	.	.	.’
Humayun	said	nothing.
‘Our	strength	in	this	new	land	must	be	our	unity	or	we	will	fail.	Spend	more	time	with	your	brothers,
teach	them	some	of	the	things	that	you	have	learned	.	.	.	You	pass	too	much	time	alone.	Many	evenings
when	I	ask	for	you,	I	am	told	you’ve	ridden	out	alone	.	.	.	Some	of	our	commanders	have	commented	to	me
that	they’ve	found	the	same	when	they’ve	sought	you	out	for	orders	or	to	make	reports.	Why	this	need	for
solitude?’
‘I	need	time	to	think	free	from	distraction	.	.	.	to	understand	myself	and	the	world	about	me,	what	it	all
means	 and	 how	 it	 works	 .	 .	 .	 I	 particularly	 like	 to	 contemplate	 the	 heavens.	 That’s	 why	 I	 go	 out	 in	 the
evenings	and	at	night.’
‘And	what	do	you	learn	from	your	star-gazing?’
‘That	under	God	the	stars	shape	our	lives,	our	destinies.	Haven’t	you	often	told	me	about	the	time	you
saw	the	Canopus	star	shining	on	the	high,	snowy	mountains	and	knew	it	was	a	sign	.	.	.	?’
‘I	do	believe	there	are	signs	in	the	stars	of	the	will	of	God,	but	I	also	believe	that	men	have	the	power
to	shape	their	own	destinies.	The	heavens	indicate	things	but	the	choices,	the	decisions,	are	for	us	to	make
.	.	.’	Babur’s	tone	was	sharper	than	he	had	intended	because	Humayun’s	expression	told	him	he	wasn’t
getting	through.
‘Father,	I’ve	never	told	you	this,	but	the	night	before	we	fought	at	Panipat,	my	astrologer	told	me	that	if,
next	day,	when	the	midday	sun	was	at	its	height	over	the	battlefield,	three	eagles	appeared,	we	would	win
a	great	victory.	In	the	dust	and	press	of	the	battle,	I	raised	my	eyes	to	the	skies,	hot	and	clear	above	the
smoke	 of	 cannon	 and	 musket,	 and	 I	 saw	 three	 eagles	 circling	 high	 above	 us.	 That’s	 not	 all.	 Now	 my
astrologer	is	predicting	a	great	destiny	for	the	Moghuls	in	Hindustan	.	.	.	That	is	why	I	spend	so	much	time
trying	to	discern	from	the	stars	what	will	happen	next.’
Babur	allowed	himself	a	brief	smile.	‘Your	belief	in	our	destiny	pleases	me	greatly.	I	would	not	wish	it
otherwise.	But	the	heavens	do	not	foreshadow	everything.	Did	they	predict	that	Buwa	would	try	to	poison
me?	Above	all,	we	need	resilience	and	application	to	hold	on	to	our	new	possessions.	Leadership	and
dedication	count	even	more	than	the	stars	.	.	.	listen	to	this	passage	from	my	diary	.	.	.’	Babur	took	the
ivory-bound	volume	back	from	his	son	and	quickly	found	the	place:	‘“A	ruler	must	at	all	times	be	vigilant,
listening	to	what	his	courtiers	are	saying	and	ready	to	pounce	on	any	sign	of	disloyalty.”
‘Remember,	Humayun,	that	there	is	no	bondage	like	the	bondage	of	kingship.	Remember	that	–	as	my
son	–	eyes	are	constantly	upon	you.	Spending	so	much	time	alone	will	be	seen	as	a	flaw.	Let	us	be	frank.	I
know	what	is	in	your	heart	and	in	your	mind	because	I	see	it	in	your	face	all	the	time.	You	want	to	know
whether	I	will	name	you	my	heir.	My	answer	is	I	am	not	certain	enough	to	do	so	.	.	.	not	yet.	I	don’t	doubt

your	 bravery	 but	 show	 me	 you	 have	 also	 the	 mental	 strength,	 the	 leadership,	 the	 focus,	 dedication	 and
application	.	.	.	Prove	to	me	the	blood	of	Timur	and	Genghis	flows	with	as	much	fire	and	purpose	through
your	veins	as	it	does	through	mine	.	.	.’

‘Majesty,	the	first	heat	of	the	riding	contest	is	about	to	begin.’
From	 the	 battlements	 of	 the	 Agra	 fort	 Babur	 could	 see	 the	 yellow	 and	 green	 banners	 driven	 into	 the
riverbank	 marking	 where	 the	 race	 would	 start.	 Six	 rows	 of	 stakes	 –	 ten	 feet	 apart	 and	 extending	 four
hundred	 yards	 –	 marked	 the	 course.	 The	 riders	 would	 gallop	 their	 horses	 in	 and	 out	 of	 them	 until	 they
reached	the	far	end	where	each	would	try	to	spear	one	of	the	six	sheep’s	heads	placed	on	the	ground	eight
feet	beyond	the	final	stake	before	turning	sharply	and	zigzagging	back	through	the	posts.	The	turns	were
tight	and	to	be	the	swiftest	would	take	skill	and	nerve.
The	 race	 was	 part	 of	 three	 days	 of	 celebrations	 to	 mark	 the	 fourth	 anniversary	 of	 Babur’s	 arrival	 in
Hindustan.	Later	there	would	be	wrestling	matches,	then	a	contest	between	his	three	eldest	sons:	the	first
to	shoot	a	pottery	jar	off	a	post	using	an	improved	design	of	musket	that	Babur	had	recently	purchased	for
his	bodyguard	would	win	an	emerald	ring.	The	gem	was	engraved	with	the	three	circles	representing	the
felicitous	conjunction	of	the	heavens	at	Timur’s	birth,	the	design	Babur	had	adopted	as	the	symbol	of	his
new	empire.
Humayun,	 Kamran	 and	 Askari	 gathered	 around	 Babur	 to	 watch	 with	 him.	 If	 any	 of	 them	 had	 been
competing	 they	 might	 well	 have	 won,	 but	 this	 race	 was	 reserved	 for	 Babur’s	 commanders.	 It	 was	 their
chance	to	display	their	skill	to	their	emperor.	The	prize	was	a	white	stallion	with	a	gilded	saddle	and	a
bridle	mounted	with	solid	gold.
Baba	 Yasaval,	 recently	 appointed	 Babur’s	 master-of-horse,	 was	 standing	 by	 the	 starting	 post,	 almost
obscured	 by	 the	 mass	 of	 spectators	 lining	 each	 side	 of	 the	 course,	 pushing	 and	 shoving	 to	 get	 the	 best
view.	As	he	raised	his	spear,	the	six	riders	in	the	first	heat	trotted	up	to	the	start.	After	a	glance	at	Babur,
who	signalled	he	was	ready,	Baba	Yasaval	lowered	his	spear.	The	riders	shot	away,	ducking	and	weaving
through	the	posts,	so	low	in	the	saddle	they	were	almost	horizontal	with	their	horses’	necks.	It	reminded
Babur	of	his	days	of	playing	polo	with	sheep’s	heads	and	he	felt	a	spasm	of	nostalgic	excitement.
The	riders	were	reaching	the	end	of	the	stakes	and	lowering	their	spears.	The	foremost	horseman	–	the
grey-bearded	Tajik,	Hassan	Hizari	–	caught	the	sheep’s	head	expertly	on	the	tip	of	his	spear	and	wheeled
round	 neatly.	 The	 rider	 just	 behind	 him	 was	 not	 so	 skilful.	 His	 spear	 tip	 missed	 the	 sheep’s	 head	 and
caught	instead	in	the	mud,	lifting	him	out	of	the	saddle	and	sending	him	into	a	spiralling	somersault	to	land
on	 his	 backside	 to	 roars	 of	 laughter.	 The	 other	 four	 were	 safely	 round,	 all	 but	 one	 having	 speared	 the
target.
It	was	nearly	an	hour	before	the	five	remaining	heats	were	completed,	the	winners	had	raced	each	other
and	one	man	had	emerged	the	victor	–	not	Hassan	Hizari,	as	Babur	had	hoped,	but	a	younger	warrior	from
Kabul	who	had	made	his	bay	mare	move	like	lightning.	Tonight	at	the	feast	Babur	would	award	him	his
prize.	Now	the	stakes	were	being	pulled	up	and	Babur’s	men	were	hurrying	into	the	fortress	to	watch	the
wrestling	contest	that	would	shortly	begin	in	the	main	courtyard	where	layers	of	thick	carpet	had	already
been	laid	over	the	stone	slabs.
‘Father,	 I’d	 like	 to	 wrestle.’	 Humayun	 was	 an	 excellent	 wrestler	 and	 knew	 it.	 Babur	 nodded	 and
Humayun	left	to	prepare.	Descending	to	the	courtyard	with	Kamran	and	Askari,	Babur	seated	himself	on
the	chair	placed	on	a	specially	erected	wooden	platform.

As	soon	as	it	had	become	known	that	the	emperor’s	son	wished	to	compete,	Humayun	had	been	placed
in	the	first	bout.	He	and	his	opponent	Saqi	Muhsin,	a	broad,	sinewy	warrior	from	Herat,	whose	habitual
boast	was	that	he	could	wrestle	four	or	five	men	at	a	time,	approached	the	dais	and	made	their	obeisance.
Both	 were	 barefoot,	 stripped	 to	 the	 waist	 and	 wearing	 close-fitting,	 striped	 breeches	 that	 fastened	 just
below	 the	 knee.	 Saqi	 Muhsin’s	 much	 scarred,	 solidly	 muscled	 body	 looked	 impressive	 but	 Humayun’s
even	more	so.	At	least	four	inches	taller	than	his	opponent,	the	taut,	perfectly	defined	muscles	in	his	arms,
back,	shoulders	and	torso	–	gleaming	with	oil	–	had	the	beauty	and	grace	of	a	thoroughbred	horse.	His
long	dark	hair	was	bound	back	with	a	scarlet	cloth.
At	Babur’s	nod,	the	bout	commenced.	The	two	men	circled	one	another,	Humayun	swaying	on	the	balls
of	his	feet,	eyes	fixed	on	his	opponent’s	face.	Suddenly,	Saqi	Muhsin	tried	to	rush	him.	Humayun	stepped
quickly	 aside,	 hooked	 his	 leg	 around	 the	 other	 man’s	 knee	 and	 brought	 him	 crashing	 to	 the	 ground.	 At
once,	 Humayun	 was	 straddling	 his	 adversary’s	 back,	 one	 arm	 round	 his	 throat,	 forcing	 his	 head	 back
while,	 with	 the	 other,	 he	 grabbed	 his	 right	 arm	 and	 twisted	 it	 till	 it	 was	 almost	 touching	 his	 shoulderblade.	Sweat	was	pouring	off	Saqi	Muhsin	and	his	face	was	contorted	with	pain.	‘I	yield	.	.	.’	he	gasped.
Humayun	won	the	next	three	bouts	which	meant,	under	the	rules,	that	he	could	retire	from	the	contest
with	 the	 title	 Unvanquished.	 Babur	 watched	 several	 more	 bouts	 but	 a	 headache,	 sharp	 and	 persistent,
behind	his	eyes,	was	troubling	him.	He	decided	to	return	to	his	apartments	to	rest	for	a	while.	Kamran	and
Askari	accompanied	him	to	the	door	of	the	chamber,	promising	to	return	for	him	in	three	hours’	time	so	he
could	witness	their	shooting	contest	with	Humayun.
Babur	 ordered	 his	 attendants	 to	 bring	 him	 some	 opium	 mixed	 with	 milk.	 He	 swallowed	 the	 pale,
sweetish	 liquid	 and	 lay	 down.	 As	 the	 pain	 in	 his	 head	 eased,	 he	 slipped	 into	 sleep.	 His	 dreams	 were
vivid	 and	 jumbled	 but	 pleasing,	 of	 Humayun’s	 strong	 but	 graceful	 body	 as	 he	 hurled	 assailant	 after
assailant	to	the	ground,	of	himself,	young	again,	careering	through	the	green	and	yellow	posts	to	win	the
riding	 contest,	 of	 Maham	 as	 she	 was	 when	 he	 first	 saw	 her,	 of	 Khanzada	 running	 on	 bare	 hennaed	 feet
along	the	dark	passages	of	the	fortress	of	Akhsi	in	pursuit	of	her	pet	mongoose,	of	Wazir	Khan	teaching
him	patiently	how	to	string	a	bow,	and	of	Baburi	in	the	meadows	below	the	citadel	of	Kabul,	revealing
the	mysteries	of	cannon	and	matchlock.
When	 Babur	 awoke,	 sunlight	 was	 still	 slanting	 through	 the	 marble	 fretwork	 of	 the	 windows.	 The
shooting	contest	wasn’t	due	to	take	place	until	early	evening	so	he	still	had	plenty	of	time.	Stretching,	he
got	up	and	splashed	his	face	with	rosewater	from	the	jade	bowl	his	attendants	replenished	four	times	a
day.	The	cool	water	felt	and	smelled	good	and	his	headache	had	cleared.
He	 caught	 a	 low	 murmuring	 from	 the	 small	 anteroom	 beyond	 the	 brocade	 hangings	 that	 separated	 it
from	 his	 bedchamber.	 It	 must	 be	 his	 attendants,	 keeping	 their	 voices	 down	 so	 as	 not	 to	 disturb	 him.
Approaching	the	hangings,	he	was	about	to	draw	them	back	but	stopped.	Surely	that	was	Kamran?	Even
though	he	was	whispering,	his	deep,	emphatic	voice	was	unmistakable.
‘Saqi	Muhsin’s	an	idiot.	I’ve	told	him	a	hundred	times	that	if	he	wants	to	out-wrestle	Humayun	there’s
no	 point	 in	 rushing	 at	 him	 like	 a	 mindless	 bull	 –	 Humayun	 is	 too	 quick.	 He	 should	 have	 waited	 for
Humayun	to	make	the	first	move.	Then	we	might	have	had	some	fun.	I’d	have	given	a	lot	to	see	Humayun
knocked	flat	on	his	arse	.	.	.	or,	better	still,	to	hear	a	rib	crack	.	.	.’
‘What	about	the	shooting	match?’	Askari’s	voice,	higher-pitched	than	his	brother’s	and	a	little	sibilant,
sounded	anxious.	‘Will	he	win	or	does	one	of	us	have	a	chance?’
‘It’s	already	taken	care	of,	little	brother.’
‘What	d’you	mean?’
‘One	 of	 my	 men	 is	 responsible	 for	 loading	 the	 muskets.	 I’ve	 told	 him	 to	 adulterate	 the	 powder	 for
Humayun’s	gun	so	that	it	doesn’t	flash	or	discharge	properly.	Even	if	it	doesn’t	wound	him,	at	least	he’ll

miss	the	target.	The	emerald	ring	will	be	one	thing	of	Father’s	at	least	that	Humayun	won’t	get	his	hands
on	.	.	.’
Babur	backed	away.	For	a	moment	he	had	hoped	he	was	dreaming	but	what	he	had	heard	had	been	real
enough.	Deliberately	he	dashed	the	jade	bowl	with	its	rosewater	to	the	floor.	The	sound	carried	as	he	had
intended.	Kamran	and	Askari	drew	back	the	hangings	and	entered.	‘We	didn’t	want	to	disturb	you,	Father,
so	we	sent	away	your	attendants	and	have	been	waiting	for	you	to	wake.	It’s	nearly	time	for	our	shooting
competition.	The	target	has	been	set	up	and	the	muskets	are	ready.	Humayun	is	already	in	the	courtyard.’
‘There	will	be	no	contest,	Kamran.	I’ve	changed	my	mind.’
‘But	why,	Father	.	.	.	?’
‘Do	you	dare	to	question	me?’
‘Of	course	not,	Father.’
‘Leave	me,	both	of	you,	and	send	my	attendants	to	me.	I	will	see	you	later	at	the	feast.’
As	 his	 servants	 dressed	 him	 for	 the	 evening’s	 festivities,	 Babur	 barely	 noticed	 the	 dark	 blue,	 goldedged	tunic	they	were	fastening	at	his	right	shoulder	with	turquoise	catches	or	the	gold	brocade	trousers
that	tucked	into	high	kid	boots.	Mechanically	he	went	through	the	motions	of	choosing	the	necklaces	and
turban	ornaments	he	would	wear.	Timur’s	heavy	gold	ring,	which	never	left	his	finger,	gleamed.	Usually
the	sight	pleased	him,	but	not	tonight.
He	had	been	in	Hindustan	for	four	years.	Tonight	he	and	his	men	would	eat	and	drink.	Later,	the	sky
above	 the	 Jumna	 would	 explode	 with	 stars	 as	 the	 magicians	 he	 had	 brought	 to	 his	 court	 from	 far	 away
Kashgar	 let	 off	 the	 devices	 they	 called	 fireworks.	 He’d	 already	 had	 a	 private	 demonstration	 and	 the
glittering	sprays	shooting	across	the	velvet	depths	of	the	night	sky	had	made	him	catch	his	breath.
But	now	everything	seemed	tainted,	tarnished.	It	was	less	what	his	sons	had	said	–	immature,	spiteful
and	stupid	–	but	the	venom	in	their	voices.	What	he	had	taken	for	normal	sibling	rivalry	was	something
more	and	it	was	his	fault.	Preoccupied	with	his	new	possessions	he	hadn’t	paid	enough	attention	to	what
was	happening	around	him.
A	ruler	must	at	all	times	be	vigilant.
Wasn’t	that	what	he	himself	had	written	in	his	diary	and	what	he	had	propounded	to	Humayun?	And	all
the	time	he’d	been	failing	to	take	his	own	advice.
Babur’s	 jaw	 tightened.	 Immediately	 after	 the	 celebrations	 he	 would	 appoint	 Askari	 and	 Kamran
governors	of	provinces	in	Hindustan.	He	would	find	plenty	of	tasks	to	keep	them	busy	and	he	would	have
them	 watched.	 As	 for	 Humayun,	 he	 would	 make	 him	 governor	 of	 the	 province	 around	 Agra	 where	 he
would	keep	a	close	eye	on	him.	He	would	discourage	those	tiresome	mystical	and	solitary	tendencies	and
involve	him	more	in	the	business	of	government.	If	Humayun	proved	up	to	it,	he	would	declare	him	his
successor	before	all	the	court.	Kamran	and	Askari	would	have	to	accept	the	appointment	and	with	it	the
futility	of	feuding	with	their	brother.	Hindustan	offered	many	opportunities.	Much	was	still	unconquered
and	they	could	carve	their	own	place	in	it	–	even	if	that	meant	being	Humayun’s	vassals.
It	was	lucky,	Babur	thought,	examining	his	appearance	in	a	mirror	of	burnished	bronze,	that	he	was	still
relatively	young.	Inshallah,	God	willing,	he	would	have	plenty	of	time	to	correct	the	faults	in	all	of	his
sons	and	to	find	ways	to	satisfy	their	competing	ambitions.

	
	
	

Chapter	27
The	Dying	of	the	Light
	

Babur’s	 head	 was	 throbbing	 with	 the	 persistent	 ache	 that	 dogged	 him	 during	 the	 monsoon.	 The	 warm
rain	had	been	falling	for	three	days	now	but	the	still,	heavy	air	held	no	promise	of	relief.	The	rains	would
go	on	for	weeks,	even	months.	Lying	back	against	silken	bolsters	in	his	bedchamber	in	the	Agra	fort,	he
tried	to	imagine	the	chill,	thin	rains	of	Ferghana	blowing	in	over	the	jagged	summit	of	Mount	Beshtor	and
failed.	The	punkah	above	his	head	hardly	disturbed	the	air.	It	was	hard	even	to	remember	what	it	was	like
not	to	feel	hot.	There	was	little	pleasure	just	now	even	in	visiting	his	garden	–	the	sodden	flowers,	soggy
ground	and	overflowing	water	channels	only	depressed	him.
Babur	got	up	and	tried	to	concentrate	on	writing	an	entry	in	his	diary	but	the	words	wouldn’t	come	and
he	pushed	his	jewel-studded	inkwell	impatiently	aside.	Maybe	he	would	go	to	the	women’s	apartments.
He	could	ask	Maham	to	sing.	Sometimes	she	accompanied	herself	on	the	round-bellied,	slender-necked
lute	that	had	once	belonged	to	Esan	Dawlat.	Maham	lacked	his	grandmother’s	gift	but	the	lute	still	made	a
sweet	sound	in	her	hands.
Or	he	might	play	a	game	of	chess	with	Humayun.	His	son	had	a	shrewd,	subtle	mind	–	but	so,	he	prided
himself,	did	he	and	he	could	usually	beat	him.	It	amused	him	to	see	Humayun’s	startled	look	as	he	clamed
victory	with	the	traditional	cry	shah	mat	–	‘check-mate’,	‘the	king	is	at	a	loss’.	Later,	they	would	discuss
Babur’s	 plans	 to	 launch	 a	 campaign	 when	 the	 rains	 eased	 against	 the	 rulers	 of	 Bengal.	 In	 their	 steamy
jungles	in	the	Ganges	delta,	they	thought	they	could	defy	Moghul	authority	and	deny	Babur’s	overlordship.
‘Send	for	my	son	Humayun	and	fetch	my	chessmen,’	Babur	ordered	a	servant.	Trying	to	shake	off	his
lethargy	 he	 got	 up	 and	 went	 to	 a	 casement	 projecting	 over	 the	 riverbank	 to	 watch	 the	 swollen,	 muddy
waters	of	the	Jumna	rushing	by.	A	farmer	was	leading	his	bony	bullocks	along	the	oozing	bank.
Hearing	footsteps	Babur	turned,	expecting	to	see	his	son,	but	it	was	only	the	white-tunicked	servant.
‘Majesty,	your	son	begs	your	forgiveness	but	he	is	unwell	and	cannot	leave	his	chamber.’
‘What	is	the	matter	with	him?’
‘I	do	not	know,	Majesty.’
Humayun	 was	 never	 ill.	 Perhaps	 he,	 too,	 was	 suffering	 from	 the	 torpor	 that	 came	 with	 the	 monsoon,
sapping	the	energy	and	spirit	of	even	the	most	vigorous.
‘I	 will	 go	 to	 him.’	 Babur	 wrapped	 a	 yellow	 silk	 robe	 round	 himself	 and	 thrust	 his	 feet	 into	 pointed
kidskin	slippers.	Then	he	hurried	from	his	apartments	to	Humayun’s	on	the	opposite	side	of	a	galleried
courtyard,	 where	 water	 was	 not	 shooting,	 as	 it	 should,	 in	 sparkling	 arcs	 from	 the	 lotus-shaped	 marble
basins	of	the	fountains	but	pouring	over	the	inundated	rims.
Humayun	was	lying	on	his	bed,	arms	thrown	back,	eyes	closed,	forehead	beaded	with	sweat,	shivering.
When	he	heard	his	father’s	voice	he	opened	his	eyes	but	they	were	bloodshot,	the	pupils	dilated.	Babur
could	hear	his	heavy	wheezing	breathing.	Every	scratchy	intake	of	air	seemed	an	effort	which	hurt	him.
‘When	did	this	illness	begin?’
‘Early	this	morning,	Father.’
‘Why	wasn’t	I	told?’	Babur	looked	angrily	at	his	son’s	attendants.	‘Send	for	my	hakim	 immediately!’

Then	 he	 dipped	 his	 own	 silk	 handkerchief	 into	 some	 water	 and	 wiped	 Humayun’s	 brow.	 The	 sweat
returned	at	once	–	in	fact,	it	was	almost	running	down	his	face	and	he	seemed	to	be	shivering	even	more
violently	now	and	his	teeth	had	begun	to	chatter.
‘Majesty,	the	hakim	is	here.’
Abdul-Malik	 went	 immediately	 to	 Humayun’s	 bedside,	 laid	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 forehead,	 pulled	 back	 his
eyelids	and	felt	his	pulse.	Then,	with	increasing	concern,	he	pulled	open	Humayun’s	robe	and,	bending,
turned	his	neatly	turbaned	head	to	listen	to	Humayun’s	heart.
‘What	is	wrong	with	him?’
Abdul-Malik	paused.	‘It	is	hard	to	say,	Majesty.	I	need	to	examine	him	further.’
‘Whatever	you	require	you	only	have	to	say	.	.	.’
‘I	 will	 send	 for	 my	 assistants.	 If	 I	 may	 be	 frank,	 it	 would	 be	 best	 if	 you	 were	 to	 leave	 the	 chamber,
Majesty.	I	will	report	to	you	when	I	have	examined	the	prince	thoroughly	–	but	it	looks	serious,	perhaps
even	grave.	His	pulse	and	heartbeat	are	weak	and	rapid.’	Without	waiting	for	Babur’s	reply,	Abdul-Malik
turned	back	to	his	patient.	Babur	hesitated	and,	after	a	glance	at	his	son’s	waxen	trembling	face,	left	the
room.	As	attendants	closed	the	doors	behind	him	he	found	that	he,	too,	was	trembling.
A	chill	closed	round	his	heart.	So	many	times	he	had	feared	for	Humayun.	At	Panipat	he	could	have
fallen	beneath	the	feet	of	one	of	Sultan	Ibrahim’s	war	elephants.	At	Khanua	he	might	have	been	felled	by
the	 slash	 of	 a	 Rajput	 sword.	 But	 he	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 Humayun	 –	 so	 healthy	 and	 strong	 –	 might
succumb	to	sickness.	How	could	he	face	life	without	his	beloved	eldest	son?	Hindustan	and	all	its	riches
would	be	worthless	if	Humayun	died.	He	would	never	have	come	to	this	sweltering,	festering	land	with
its	endless	hot	rains	and	whining,	blood-sucking	mosquitoes	if	he	had	known	this	would	be	the	price.
Babur	spent	the	next	half-hour	pacing	round	the	dripping	courtyard	and	resisting	the	desire	to	send	at
once	to	the	hakim	to	demand	news.	But	at	last	Abdul-Malik	appeared.	Babur	tried	unsuccessfully	to	read
his	face.
‘The	prince	has	a	very	high	fever	and	is	becoming	delirious	.	.	.’
‘What	is	it?	Not	poison?’
‘No,	Majesty,	there	has	been	no	vomiting.	I	cannot	say	what	the	cause	is.	We	can	only	try	to	sweat	the
infection	out.	I	have	ordered	fires	to	be	lit	in	his	room	and	I	will	prepare	a	cordial	of	spices	to	heat	his
blood	.	.	.’
‘Is	there	nothing	else	to	be	done?	Nothing	I	can	send	for?’
‘No,	Majesty.	We	must	wait.	God	alone	will	decide	his	fate	as	he	does	for	us	all.’
All	through	the	night,	Abdul-Malik	and	his	assistants	tended	Humayun.	In	the	almost	suffocating	heat	of
the	room,	Babur	sat	close	by	the	bed	as	his	son	heaved	and	tossed,	struggling	to	throw	off	the	thick	wool
blankets	that	the	hakim	had	ordered	to	be	piled	on	him.	All	the	time	Humayun	was	muttering,	sometimes
shouting.	The	words	were	incomprehensible	to	Babur.
In	the	hour	before	dawn,	as	a	pale	yellow	sliver	of	light	appeared	on	the	eastern	horizon,	Humayun’s
delirium	 worsened.	 He	 began	 to	 shriek	 as	 if	 in	 terrible	 pain	 and	 to	 shake	 so	 convulsively	 that	 had	 the
hakim’s	assistants	not	held	him	down	he	would	have	fallen	from	the	bed.	His	eyes	were	bulging	and	his
tongue	–	furry	and	yellow	–	protruded	through	dry	lips.
Suddenly	unable	to	bear	the	sights	and	sounds	of	his	son’s	suffering,	Babur	turned	and	left	the	chamber.
In	 the	 courtyard,	 he	 bent	 and	 immersed	 his	 head	 in	 the	 lotus	 basin	 of	 one	 of	 the	 fountains.	 As	 the	 cool
water	filled	his	nose	and	ears,	it	was	as	if	–	just	for	a	moment	–	he	could	insulate	himself	from	the	pain
and	anxieties	of	the	world.	Reluctantly	he	straightened	and	wiped	the	water	from	his	eyes.
‘Forgive	me,	Majesty	.	.	.’
Babur	 glanced	 round.	 The	 diminutive	 figure	 of	 Humayun’s	 astrologer,	 in	 the	 rust-coloured	 robes	 that

always	looked	too	large	for	him,	was	standing	beside	him.	Babur	brushed	his	wet	hair	off	his	face.	‘What
is	it?’
‘I	 have	 been	 looking	 into	 the	 heavens,	 Majesty,	 trying	 to	 discern	 what	 is	 written	 there	 about	 God’s
plans	for	my	master.	There	is	something	I	must	tell	you.	Your	son’s	life	lies	in	your	hands.	If	you	wish	him
to	live	you	must	make	a	great	sacrifice	.	.	.’
‘I	would	do	anything	to	save	him.’	Without	realising	it,	Babur	had	seized	the	astrologer’s	wrist.
‘You	must	offer	up	the	most	precious	thing	you	possess	.	.	.’
‘What	is	that?’
‘Only	you	can	know,	Majesty.’
Babur	turned	and,	half	running,	half	stumbling,	made	for	the	fort	mosque.	Flinging	himself	down	on	the
stone	 floor	 before	 the	 ornately	 carved	 plaster	 niche	 of	 the	 mihrab	 he	 began	 to	 pray,	 rocking	 back	 and
forth,	eyes	tight	shut,	pouring	every	ounce	of	himself	into	the	promise	he	was	making	to	God:	‘Let	me	be
the	sacrifice.	Let	me	take	on	the	burden	of	my	son’s	pain.	Let	me,	not	him,	be	the	one	to	die	.	.	.	Take	my
life	.	.	.’

For	three	long	days	and	nights,	Babur	had	been	sitting	alone	in	his	chambers,	barely	eating	and	drinking
and	postponing	all	official	business.	He	knew	he	should	go	to	Maham	but	the	thought	of	her	anxiety	for	her
son	–	her	only	child	–	on	top	of	his	own	overwhelmed	him.	Neither	could	he	write	to	Kamran	and	Askari
in	 their	 distant	 provinces.	 What	 would	 he	 say	 to	 them?	 That	 Humayun	 had	 fallen	 ill	 and	 that	 the	 hakim
held	out	little	hope?	Even	if	he	did	write,	they	could	never	reach	Agra	in	time.	And	at	the	back	of	Babur’s
mind	was	a	suspicion	he	could	hardly	bring	himself	to	contemplate:	that	Kamran	and	Askari	might	not	be
sorry	to	learn	that	their	older	half-brother	was	dying.
Why	hadn’t	God	accepted	his	sacrifice?	Why	was	he	still	breathing	whilst	Humayun’s	life	ebbed	.	.	.	?
Babur	had	never	known	quite	such	depths	of	despair	as	the	hours	dragged	by.	Whichever	path	he	tried	to
turn	his	mind	down,	it	ended	in	the	blackest	darkness.	Though	the	loss	of	Baburi	had	felt	like	the	death	of
part	 of	 himself,	 that	 had	 been	 a	 personal	 grief.	 If	 Humayun	 died	 it	 would	 also	 be	 an	 overwhelming
personal	 loss	 –	 he	 had	 become	 closer	 to	 Humayun	 than	 to	 any	 of	 his	 other	 sons	 –	 but	 it	 would	 be
something	more	too.	It	would	be	God’s	way	of	saying	that	everything	Babur	had	striven	for,	everything	he
had	achieved,	had	been	for	nothing	.	.	.	that	he	would	never	found	an	empire	or	a	dynasty	to	prosper	in
Hindustan	.	.	.	that	he	should	never	have	come	–	or,	at	the	very	least,	not	tried	to	outdo	Timur	by	staying
on.	 He	 should	 have	 been	 less	 proud,	 less	 blown	 up	 with	 vanity,	 and	 contented	 himself	 with	 his
mountainous	lands	beyond	the	Khyber	Pass.
Babur	glanced	at	his	diary,	lying	open	on	a	low	table.	What	a	piece	of	conceit	it	had	been	to	think	it
worth	giving	to	Humayun	to	guide	him	one	day	in	ruling,	never	thinking	his	son	might	not	live	long	enough
to	rule.	He	was	tempted	to	throw	it	on	to	the	fire,	burning	so	bright	and	hot	in	Humayun’s	sick	chamber	.	.	.
But	he	could	no	longer	bring	himself	to	go	there	and	witness	Humayun’s	shrieking,	agonised	delirium.
‘Majesty	.	.	.’
Babur	turned.	One	of	the	hakim’s	assistants	was	before	him.	The	man	looked	worn	out,	the	skin	beneath
his	eyes	so	shadowed	it	looked	bruised.	‘My	master	asks	that	you	should	come	.	.	.’
Babur	ran	to	Humayun’s	chamber.
Abdul-Malik	was	waiting	for	him	at	the	entrance,	hands	folded	across	his	stomach.	‘Majesty	.	.	.	your
son	gave	a	great	groan	.	.	.	and	I	thought	–	I	truly	believed	–	his	end	had	come	.	.	.	Then	his	eyes	opened

and	he	looked	at	me	and	knew	me	.	.	.	He	is	very	weak	but	the	fever	has	left	him	even	more	suddenly	than
it	came	.	.	.’	The	hakim	shook	his	head,	as	much	puzzled	as	he	was	joyful.	‘I	have	never	seen	a	case	like
it,	Majesty	.	.	.	It	is	a	miracle.’

Humayun	was	cantering	along	the	sunlit	riverbank	below	the	Agra	fort,	his	black	hawk	in	its	tufted	red
leather	 hood	 on	 his	 gauntleted	 wrist.	 Later	 he	 would	 join	 him,	 Babur	 decided.	 It	 had	 been	 a	 long	 time
since	he’d	gone	hawking.	First,	though,	he’d	visit	his	gardens	over	the	Jumna	where	he	wished	to	discuss
the	planting	of	apricots	with	his	gardeners.	Reluctantly	he	drew	his	eyes	from	the	sight	of	Humayun,	so
vigorous	and	strong	again	just	four	months	after	his	miraculous	recovery	from	his	illness.
Babur	made	for	the	carved	sandstone	staircase	that	descended	to	a	little	gate	at	the	base	of	the	fortress
wall.	 A	 few	 feet	 beyond	 it,	 further	 steps	 –	 narrow	 and	 mottled	 with	 lichen	 –	 led	 to	 the	 jetty	 where	 his
gilded	barge	was	waiting	to	carry	him	along	the	river.	Suddenly	he	felt	a	searing	pain	in	his	stomach	so
severe	that	he	gasped	and	put	out	a	hand	to	clutch	the	balustrade.	As	the	pain	started	to	ease	and	he	began
to	breathe	more	deeply,	it	came	again,	spreading	to	engulf	his	whole	body.	He	swayed	dizzily	.	.	.	‘Help
me	.	.	.’
Strong	hands	took	hold	of	him	under	his	armpits,	raising	him.	Who	was	it?	He	looked	up	gratefully	but
saw	nothing	except	an	enfolding	darkness.

‘His	 bowels	 have	 not	 moved	 .	 .	 .	 he	 passes	 no	 urine	 .	 .	 .	 he	 doesn’t	 eat.	 He’s	 taken	 nothing	 but	 a	 little
water	for	thirty-six	hours	now	.	.	.	Whether	this	is	a	delayed	consequence	of	Buwa’s	poison	I	cannot	say
.	.	.’
Babur	could	hear	voices,	low,	strained,	anxious.	Who	were	they	talking	about?	His	mouth	and	tongue
were	so	dry	.	.	.	A	few	drops	of	water	flowed	between	his	parched	lips.	He	tried	to	swallow	but	it	was	so
hard	.	.	.	His	eyes	flickered	briefly	open.	The	figures	hovering	over	him	were	shadowy	and	indistinct.	He
tasted	more	water	–	someone	was	gently	pushing	a	metal	spoon	into	his	mouth	.	.	.	Now	he	knew	who	it
was	and	where	he	was	.	.	.	He	was	lying	ill	in	a	cave	tucked	in	a	fold	in	the	mountains	where	his	enemies
couldn’t	find	him.	Wazir	Khan	was	on	his	knees	beside	him,	dripping	water	into	his	mouth.	As	soon	as	he
was	well	they	would	ride	together	for	Ferghana	.	.	.
‘Wazir	Khan	.	.	.	?’	He	managed	only	a	croaking	rasp.	‘Wazir	Khan	.	.	.’	He	tried	again.	That	was	better,
his	voice	sounded	louder	this	time.
‘No,	Father.	It’s	me,	Humayun.’
Humayun?	Babur	struggled	to	make	sense	of	this	and	failed.
‘Your	son.’
This	time	it	registered.	With	a	tremendous	effort	Babur	brought	himself	back	to	the	present,	opened	his
green	eyes	and	saw	his	son’s	stricken	face.	‘What	.	.	.	what	is	happening	to	me	.	.	.	?’
‘You’re	ill,	Father.	You’ve	been	drifting	in	and	out	of	consciousness	.	.	.	You’ve	had	another	attack	–
that	 makes	 four	 in	 all	 since	 you	 were	 first	 taken	 ill,	 each	 worse	 than	 the	 last,	 I’m	 afraid	 .	 .	 .	 But	 don’t
worry	.	.	.	Abdul-Malik	is	hopeful.	He	is	doing	what	he	can.’
After	drinking	a	little	more	water	–	it	was	still	all	he	could	do	to	swallow	–	Babur	lay	back	again,	eyes
closed,	exhausted	by	the	effort	but	feeling	his	faculties	return.	He	must	be	seriously	ill	.	.	.	perhaps	so	ill

he	was	going	to	die	.	.	.	The	prospect	sent	an	involuntary	shudder	through	him.	Could	it	really	be?	Not
when	he	still	had	so	much	to	do	in	his	fledgling	empire	.	.	.	so	much	of	life	to	enjoy.	He	wanted	to	see	his
sons	mature	and	guide	them	as	they	did	so.	Surely	God	would	not	deny	him	that	.	.	.
But	then	another	thought	washed	through	his	mind.	Perhaps	God	had	decided	to	call	in	his	promise	to
give	his	own	life	for	Humayun’s.	Perhaps	he	had	been	right	when,	in	his	euphoria	and	relief	at	Humayun’s
miraculous	 recovery,	 he	 had	 believed	 God	 had	 listened	 to	 his	 despairing	 prayer	 .	 .	 .	 If	 so,	 the	 greatest
achievement	of	his	life	had	been	to	save	his	son	because	it	was	Humayun	whom	God	intended	to	secure
the	 future	 of	 the	 empire.	 Maybe	 there	 was	 a	 pattern,	 a	 meaning	 to	 his	 life	 after	 all.	 That	 would	 be	 a
pleasant,	comforting	thought.	Babur	lay	back,	defiance	yielding	to	acceptance,	even	to	a	sense	of	triumph,
in	his	hazy	mind.	What	did	his	death	matter	so	long	as	he	had	laid	the	foundations	for	his	dynasty?
Then	 a	 new	 thought	 pierced	 him	 with	 a	 sudden	 and	 absolute	 clarity.	 If	 he	 really	 were	 going	 to	 die,
either	in	fulfilment	of	his	vow	or	by	random	fate,	he	must	make	Humayun’s	position	secure.	Otherwise,	the
fledgling	Moghul	empire	would	disintegrate,	just	as	Timur’s	had	done,	into	conflict	between	his	sons	and
rebellion	by	his	vassals.	He	must	name	Humayun	his	sole	heir	.	.	.	bind	his	commanders	and	nobles	to	him
.	.	.	give	him	what	guidance	he	could	in	the	short	time	he	had	left	.	.	.
Babur	 was	 beginning	 to	 sweat.	 His	 pulse	 was	 racing	 and	 the	 pains	 were	 returning.	 It	 needed	 all	 his
resolve	.	.	.	more	than	in	any	battle	.	.	.	for	his	mind	to	master	his	body	but	–	he	told	himself	–	he	had
never	lacked	courage.	He	pulled	himself	into	a	sitting	position.	‘Summon	my	council.	I	must	speak	to	them
.	.	.	Have	a	scribe	present	to	record	my	words.	But	first	let	me	speak	to	my	sister	alone	.	.	.	Bring	her
quickly.’
While	he	waited,	he	tried	silently	to	rehearse	his	words	but	his	mind	kept	drifting.
‘Babur	.	.	.’	Khanzada’s	voice	roused	him.
‘Sister,	 it	 is	 many	 years	 ago	 that	 you	 first	 looked	 down	 on	 me	 in	 my	 crib	 .	 .	 .	 Since	 then	 we	 have
endured	much	and	achieved	much.	Like	most	brothers,	I’ve	never	told	you	how	much	I’ve	loved	you	.	.	.
appreciated	you	.	.	.	I	do	so	now	.	.	.	now	that	I	feel	I	am	dying.	Try	not	to	grieve	.	.	.	I	don’t	fear	death,
only	 what	 will	 happen	 to	 our	 dynasty	 when	 I	 am	 gone.	 I	 wish	 Humayun	 to	 succeed	 me	 but	 I	 worry	 his
brothers	will	not	accept	it	.	.	.	that	they	may	rebel	against	him.	You	are	the	only	blood	kin	common	to	all
my	sons.	They	respect	you	.	.	.	and	what	you	have	suffered	for	the	family,	so	they	will	listen	to	you	.	.	.
Watch	over	them	as	you	once	watched	over	me	.	.	.	Remind	them	of	their	heritage	and	their	duty	to	it	.	.	.
and	do	not	let	their	mothers	incite	their	rivalries	.	.	.’
Babur	paused,	exhausted.
‘I	promise,	little	brother.’	Khanzada’s	lips	brushed	his	forehead	and	he	felt	moisture	–	her	tears	not	his
–	on	his	cheek.
‘We’ve	travelled	a	long	road,	have	we	not,	sister?’	he	whispered.	‘A	long	and	sometimes	painful	road,
but	 one	 that	 has	 brought	 our	 family	 to	 a	 glorious	 destination	 .	 .	 .	 Now	 call	 my	 attendants	 to	 put	 on	 my
ceremonial	robes.	I	must	speak	to	my	council	and	my	time	is	ebbing	.	.	.’
A	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	when	the	council	was	ushered	in,	Babur	was	sitting	in	his	green	robes	on	one
of	 his	 gilded	 thrones,	 cushions	 supporting	 his	 body.	 As	 they	 entered,	 Babur	 closed	 his	 eyes	 again	 but
willed	himself	not	to	drift	away.	He	must	keep	his	mind	clear.	He	heard	a	murmuring	all	around	him.
‘Father,	they	are	here.’
Opening	his	eyes,	Babur	found	he	could	no	longer	focus	fully	.	.	.	No	matter.	What	mattered	was	that
they	should	all	hear	his	words.	He	took	a	deep	breath	of	air	into	his	congested	lungs	and	began:	‘As	you
can	see	I	am	unwell	.	.	.	My	life	is	in	God’s	hands.	Should	I	die,	our	great	destiny	must	not	die	with	me,
evaporate	in	the	heat	and	dust	.	.	.	It	is	up	to	you	all	to	fulfil	it,	united	as	you	are	now,	undistracted	by
internal	strife.	To	achieve	that	you	must	know	my	wish	for	my	successor.’

Babur	paused	to	take	more	strength.	‘I	have	for	some	time	thought	of	Humayun	as	my	heir	because	of
his	virtues	and	bravery	.	.	.	but	seduced	by	my	vigour,	my	desire,	into	assuming	I	might	live	long,	I	have
failed	to	tell	you.	I	do	so	now.	I	appoint	Humayun	my	heir.	I	commend	him	to	you.	Swear	to	me	you	will
follow	him	as	loyally	and	bravely	as	you	have	followed	me.	Swear	to	him	your	allegiance.’
There	was	silence	for	a	moment,	then	a	united	chorus:	‘Majesty,	we	so	swear.’
‘Humayun,	take	Timur’s	ring	from	my	finger.	It	is	yours.	Wear	it	with	pride	and	never	forget	the	duties	it
imposes	on	you	to	your	dynasty	and	to	your	loyal	people.	Have	you	all	heard	my	words?’
‘Yes,	Majesty.’
‘Then	leave	me,	all	of	you,	except	Humayun.	I	wish	to	be	alone	with	my	son	.	.	.’
Babur	shut	his	eyes	and	waited.	He	heard	feet	shuffling	away	over	thick	carpets	but	then	a	door	closed
and	all	was	quiet.	‘Are	they	gone?’
‘Yes,	Father.’
‘Listen	to	me.	I	have	some	other	things	to	say	to	you.	First,	take	care	to	know	yourself,	to	understand
yourself,	and	how	to	master	any	weaknesses	.	.	.	but,	above	all,	preserve	the	unity	of	our	dynasty.	I	am	not
so	 foolish	 as	 to	 think	 jealousies	 will	 not	 arise	 between	 you	 and	 your	 half-brothers.	 Do	 nothing	 against
them,	however	much	you	think	they	might	deserve	it.	Reconcile	them,	love	them.	Remember	the	principle
established	 by	 our	 ancestor	 Timur	 that	 the	 lives	 of	 princes	 are	 sacred	 .	 .	 .	 Promise	 me,	 Humayun	 .	 .	 .
promise	me	you	understand	my	commands	and	will	fulfil	them.’
Babur	began	to	feel	dizzy.	He	could	hear	nothing	from	Humayun.	‘Why	don’t	you	answer	me?’
‘Do	not	distress	yourself,	Father.	I	promise.’
Babur	slumped	against	the	cushions,	his	face	and	body	relaxing,	but	then	he	spoke	once	more.	‘There	is
one	last	thing.	Do	not	bury	me	here	in	Hindustan.	This	will	become	your	homeland	and	the	homeland	of
your	children,	but	it	is	not	mine.	Take	my	body	back	to	Kabul	.	.	.	I	have	written	my	wishes	in	my	diary
.	.	.’
Humayun	was	starting	to	sob.
‘Don’t	be	sad	for	me.	It’s	what	I	prayed	for	when	you	were	ill.	Your	astrologer	told	me	what	I	must	do
–	that	I	must	offer	up	what	was	most	precious	to	me.	I	offered	God	my	life	for	yours	and	I	did	it	gladly.
God	has	been	good.	He	gave	us	some	time	together	before	gathering	in	the	debt	.	.	.’
Humayun	looked	down	at	his	father’s	wasted	face.	How	could	he	tell	him	that	that	hadn’t	been	what	the
astrologer	had	meant?	The	man	had	told	him	of	the	conversation.	He	had	been	asking	Babur	to	give	up
some	of	his	treasure,	perhaps	the	Koh-i-Nur,	his	Mountain	of	Light,	not	his	own	life	.	.	.
But	a	smile	was	curving	his	father’s	dry	lips	and	he	was	trying	to	speak	again.	‘Don’t	grieve.	It	means
God	listened	to	me	.	.	.	I	go	gladly	.	.	.	knowing	that	you	will	continue	what	I	have	begun.	They	are	all
waiting	 for	 me,	 all	 those	 I	 loved	 who	 have	 gone	 before	 me	 to	 Paradise	 .	 .	 .	 my	 father,	 my	 mother	 and
grandmother,	 Wazir	 Khan	 and	 my	 friend	 Baburi	 .	 .	 .	 even	 Timur	 with	 his	 eyes	 like	 candles	 without
brilliance	.	.	.	I	can	see	him	and	I	will	tell	him	what	we	did	.	.	.	how	we,	like	him,	crossed	the	Indus	and
won	a	great	victory	.	.	.	how	we	.	.	.’
Babur	 felt	 a	 warm	 peace	 envelop	 him.	 He	 was	 falling,	 floating,	 his	 consciousness	 diminishing.
Whatever	 he	 had	 been	 going	 to	 say	 next,	 Humayun	 would	 never	 know.	 With	 a	 long,	 low	 sigh	 his	 father
breathed	his	last	and	his	head	slumped	forward.
Humayun	lowered	his	own	head	and	began	to	pray:	‘Speed	my	father	to	Paradise.	Give	me	the	strength
to	continue	what	he	began	so	that,	looking	down	on	me,	he	will	be	proud	.	.	.	Give	me	the	strength	.	.	.’
Rising	at	last,	Humayun	took	one	last	look	at	his	father,	then	turned	away.	Tears	filled	his	eyes	again
and	 he	 struggled	 to	 steady	 his	 voice.	 ‘Abdul-Malik,’	 he	 called,	 ‘the	 emperor	 is	 dead	 .	 .	 .	 Send	 for	 the
embalmers	.	.	.’

Two	days	later,	Humayun	watched	as	six	officers	laid	Babur’s	body,	washed	in	camphor,	wrapped	in	a
soft,	woollen	shroud	and	enclosed	in	a	silver	coffin	packed	with	spices,	on	a	gilded	cart	drawn	by	twelve
black	 oxen.	 Then,	 to	 the	 slow	 beating	 of	 drums,	 the	 funeral	 cortège	 began	 the	 long,	 slow	 journey	 that
would	 take	 it	 north-west	 over	 the	 bleached	 plains	 of	 Hindustan,	 across	 the	 Indus	 and	 up	 through	 the
winding,	dun-grey	hills	of	the	Khyber	Pass	to	Kabul.	Humayun	knew	it	was	right	that	in	death	his	father
should	return	to	the	mountainous	lands	he	had	loved.
As	Babur	had	asked,	when	his	body	reached	Kabul	it	would	be	laid	in	the	earth	in	the	hillside	garden
Babur	himself	had	created	beneath	a	simple	marble	slab	close	to	Baburi’s	grave	and	those	of	his	mother
and	grandmother.	As	Babur	had	also	wished,	nothing	would	be	constructed	over	it,	no	great	edifice.	The
grave	of	the	first	Moghul	emperor	would	lie	exposed	to	the	winds	and	soft	rain	beneath	the	infinite	canopy
of	the	sky.
Humayun	glanced	at	Kamran,	Askari	and	Hindal	close	beside	him.	Their	sombre	faces	told	him	they
shared	his	grief	and	that	for	the	moment,	they	were	united.	But	how	long	would	that	last?	Might	they	come
to	 resent	 his	 father	 having	 given	 him	 supreme	 power	 rather	 than	 dividing	 his	 realm	 between	 them?
Ambition	–	the	relentless	hunger	for	fresh	conquest	and	the	power	it	would	bring	that	he	had	long	felt	stir
within	himself	–	would	undoubtedly	rise	in	them,	especially	Kamran,	so	close	to	him	in	age	.	.	.	Would	he
not	 feel	 resentment	 in	 Kamran’s	 place?	 Or	 Askari’s?	 Even	 little	 Hindal	 might	 soon	 consider	 the	 world
with	a	cool,	ambitious,	speculative	eye.	All	sons	of	an	emperor,	it	was	in	the	blood	of	each	of	them	to
desire	 to	 be	 the	 one	 to	 lead	 their	 dynasty	 to	 new	 heights.	 How	 long	 before	 Babur’s	 memory	 faded	 and
brotherly	feeling	waned?	Might	they	become	like	snapping	dogs	circling	the	same	piece	of	meat?	Before
he	realised	what	he	was	doing,	Humayun	stepped	away	from	his	half-brothers,	whose	eyes	were	still	on
the	cortège	as,	with	its	escort,	it	slowly	disappeared	round	a	bend	in	the	road	through	the	city	of	Agra,
leaving	a	pall	of	orange	dust	hanging	in	its	wake.
‘Do	nothing	against	your	half-brothers	.	.	.	love	them	.	.	.	reconcile	them	.	.	.’	Babur’s	words,	the	last
instructions	of	a	loved	and	loving	father,	resounded	inside	Humayun’s	head.	He	had	made	a	promise	 to
Babur	and	he	would	keep	it.	Doing	so	would	not	be	easy	and	might	demand	all	his	self-restraint.	Babur’s
words	had	in	part	been	a	warning	.	.	.	For	generations	the	House	of	Timur	had	ripped	itself	apart.	Brother
had	turned	on	brother,	cousin	on	cousin,	and	their	feuding	had	irredeemably	weakened	them,	making	them
easy	prey	to	external	enemies	like	the	Uzbeks.	He,	the	new	Moghul	emperor,	must	not	let	that	happen	in
Hindustan.	It	was	his	sacred	duty.
Humayun	looked	down	at	Timur’s	heavy	gold	ring,	an	unaccustomed	weight	on	his	right	hand,	with	the
spitting,	flat-eared	tiger	carved	deep	into	the	metal.	It	had	seen	so	many	conflicts,	so	many	conquests	.	.	.
where	would	it	travel	with	him?	What	glories,	what	disasters	might	it	see	while	on	his	hand?	That	was
not	yet	for	him	to	know	but,	whatever	happened,	he	would	never	bring	dishonour	on	his	dynasty	or	on	his
father’s	 memory.	 Raising	 the	 ring	 to	 his	 lips	 he	 kissed	 it	 and	 made	 a	 silent	 vow:	 ‘I	 will	 be	 a	 worthy
successor	to	my	father,	and	all	the	world	will	have	cause	to	remember	me.’

Historical	Note
	

Babur’s	life	was	a	whirlwind	of	battles,	blood	feuds	and	epic	challenges	so	numerous	that	even	he	did
not	 document	 everything	 in	 his	 disarmingly	 frank	 memoirs,	 the	 Baburnama	 –	 the	 first	 autobiography	 in
Islamic	literature.	In	fact,	he	left	numerous	gaps,	some	covering	considerable	periods	of	years.	Despite
these	omissions,	the	main	events	of	his	life,	such	as	his	three	captures	of	Samarkand,	his	conflict	with	the
Uzbeks	and,	of	course,	his	establishment	of	the	Moghul	Empire	in	north-western	India	–	Hindustan,	as	it
was	then	known	–	are	clear	from	the	Baburnama	and	other	sources.	I	have	described	the	principal	events
in	 their	 historical	 sequence,	 though	 condensing,	 combining	 or	 omitting	 some	 incidents	 and	 compressing
some	timescales.
Babur’s	grandmother	Esan	Dawlat	–	whose	advice,	he	says	in	the	Baburnama,	he	relied	on	in	his	youth
–	his	mother	Kutlugh	Nigar	and	his	sister	Khanzada	all	existed,	as	did	his	traitorous	half-brother	Jahangir.
Babur’s	father	indeed	fell	to	his	death	from	his	dovecote	at	Akhsi	when	the	battlements	collapsed	beneath
him.	 Similarly,	 Babur’s	 main	 enemies	 –	 Shah	 Ismail	 of	 Persia,	 Sultan	 Ibrahim	 of	 Delhi	 and	 the	 Uzbek
warlord	Shaibani	Khan,	who	really	did	carry	off	Khanzada,	are	also	historical.	However,	I	have	used	the
liberties	afforded	to	historical	novelists	to	flesh	out	some	of	the	other	characters	or	to	create	new	ones
based	 on	 a	 combination	 of	 real	 people	 important	 in	 Babur’s	 life.	 Wazir	 Khan	 and	 Baisanghar	 fall	 into
these	categories,	as	indeed	does	Baburi	–	though	in	his	memoirs	Babur	writes	fondly	of	a	market	boy	of
that	name.
The	social	and	military	contexts	are	described	as	accurately	as	possible.	For	example,	though	he	was	a
Sunni	 Muslim,	 Babur	 describes	 with	 relish	 his	 mammoth	 drinking	 binges	 and	 frequent	 consumption	 of
bhang	(cannabis)	and	opium.	His	acquisition	from	Ottoman	Turkey	of	gunpowder	weapons	and	his	skilful
deployment	of	them	are	also	based	on	fact	and	were	indeed	the	turning	point	in	his	fortunes.
At	 one	 time	 or	 other,	 I’ve	 visited	 nearly	 all	 the	 places	 important	 to	 Babur’s	 story.	 His	 ancestral
kingdom	of	Ferghana	–	in	modern-day	Uzbekistan	and	Kyrgyzstan	–	is	still	a	place	of	apple,	almond	and
apricot	 orchards,	 with	 beds	 of	 juicy	 melons	 the	 size	 of	 footballs.	 In	 late	 summer,	 men	 and	 women	 still
thresh	the	grain	by	hand,	using	flails,	sending	clouds	of	golden	chaff	into	the	air,	and	herds	of	sheep,	goats
and	 shaggy	 yaks	 browse	 the	 high	 pastures,	 guarded	 by	 mounted	 herdsmen	 and	 their	 vigilant	 dogs.	 I’ve
slept	in	their	conical	felt	tents,	eaten	their	root	vegetables,	mutton	and	buttered	rice,	which	would	have
been	so	familiar	to	Babur,	and	drunk	the	fermented	mare’s	milk	that	warmed	him.	In	late	September,	I’ve
felt	the	air	turn	suddenly	chilly	and	watched	the	first	snowflakes	start	to	fall	in	the	high	passes.	In	spring,
I’ve	seen	the	rivers	and	streams	swollen	with	meltwater.	I’ve	followed	Babur	over	the	rolling	hills	and
golden	 grasslands	 to	 Samarkand,	 to	 Kabul	 where	 his	 simple	 grave	 –	 recently	 restored	 with	 funds	 from
Unesco	–	still	sits	on	the	hillside	above	the	city,	down	through	the	Khyber	Pass	to	the	plains	of	northern
India,	to	Delhi,	Agra	and	Rajasthan.
Everything	I	saw	on	those	travels,	everything	I	experienced,	added	to	my	admiration	of	and	affection
for	Babur	not	only	as	warrior,	adventurer,	survivor	and	founder	of	the	Moghul	Empire	but	also	as	writer,
gardener	and	lover	of	poetry	and	architecture.
Babur,	 of	 course,	 would	 have	 used	 the	 Muslim	 lunar	 calendar	 but	 I	 have	 converted	 dates	 into	 the
conventional	solar,	Christian	calendar	we	use	in	the	west.

Specific	Notes
p.3	 Timur,	 a	 chieftain	 of	 the	 nomadic	 Barlas	 Turks,	 is	 better	 known	 in	 the	 west	 as	 Tamburlaine,	 a
corruption	of	‘Timur	the	Lame’.	Christopher	Marlowe’s	play	portrays	him	as	‘The	Scourge	of
God’.
p.26	 The	 reading	 of	 the	 sermon,	 the	 khutba,	 in	 the	 mosque	 was	 the	 usual	 formal	 means	 of
proclaiming	sovereignty	in	Islamic	countries.
p.51	Timur’s	fortress	in	Samarkand,	the	Kok	Saray,	was	in	later	times	destroyed	by	the	Persians.	A
square	now	covers	the	site.
p.86	Registan	Square:	today	two	sides	of	the	square	are	formed	by	madrasas	built	after	Babur’s	time
on	 the	 sites	 of	 earlier	 pilgrims’	 hostels	 and	 caravanserais.	 However,	 Ulugh	 Beg’s	 exquisite
madrasa,	decorated	with	bright	blue	stars,	survives	from	the	early	fifteenth	century.
p.88	 A	 Russian	 archaeologist	 in	 the	 early	 1940s	 obtained	 permission	 to	 open	 Timur’s	 tomb.	 He
entered	the	crypt	on	22	June	1941,	at	night	to	avoid	offending	local	sensitivities.	Around	three
a.m.	 he	 opened	 the	 coffin.	 Almost	 immediately	 his	 assistant	 rushed	 in	 with	 the	 news	 of	 the
invasion	 by	 Hitler	 of	 Russia.	 His	 examination	 of	 Timur’s	 remains	 took	 more	 than	 eighteen
months	and	confirmed	that	Timur	was	lame	through	an	injury	to	his	right	leg.	Within	days	of	the
skeleton	being	reinterred,	the	Germans	surrendered	at	Stalingrad.
p.91	 The	 visionary	 Ulugh	 Beg’s	 observatory	 on	 Kohak	 Hill	 outside	 Samarkand	 is	 thought	 to	 have
been	a	three-storey	circular	tower	with	a	diameter	of	some	forty-six	metres.	The	remains	of	the
half	of	his	giant	sextant	that	was	set	into	the	ground	can	still	be	seen.
p.92	In	the	courtyard	of	the	Bibi	Khanym	mosque,	amid	mulberry	and	quince	trees,	there	is	a	giant
marble	stand	on	which	the	Osman	Koran,	said	to	be	the	second	in	history	and	captured	by	Timur
from	 the	 Turks,	 once	 rested.	 It	 is	 now	 in	 Tashkent.	 Bibi	 Khanym’s	 tomb	 lies	 opposite	 the
mosque.
p.195	The	story	of	Borte,	Genghis	Khan’s	wife,	is	true.
p.263	Humayun	was	born	to	Maham	in	1508.
p.271	As	Kamran	was	born	to	Gulrukh	during	a	period	not	covered	in	the	Baburnama,	the	precise
date	is	unknown	but	he	was	clearly	very	close	to	Humayun	in	age.
p.285	 Shah	 Ismail’s	 forces	 killed	 Shaibani	 Khan	 in	 1510.	 The	 Shah	 had	 a	 gold-mounted	 cup
fashioned	from	his	skull	and	sent	the	straw-stuffed	skin	of	his	head	as	a	present	to	the	Ottoman
Turks.
p.300	The	Safawid	dynasty	had	made	the	Shia	practice	of	Islam	the	state	religion	of	Persia	in	1501.
The	distinction	between	Shia	and	Sunni	derived	from	the	first	century	of	Islam	and	originally
related	 to	 who	 was	 Muhammad’s	 legitimate	 successor	 and	 whether	 the	 office	 should	 be	 an
elected	 one	 or	 restricted,	 as	 the	 Shias	 claimed,	 to	 the	 descendants	 of	 the	 Prophet	 through	 his
cousin	and	son-in-law,	Ali.	‘Shia’	means	‘party’	and	comes	from	the	phrase	‘the	party	of	Ali’.
‘Sunni’	means	‘those	who	follow	the	custom,	“Sunna”,	of	Muhammad’.	By	the	sixteenth	century
further	 differences	 had	 grown	 between	 the	 two	 sects,	 such	 as	 the	 nature	 of	 required	 daily
prayer.
p.318	Askari	was	born	to	Gulrukh	in	1516.	Hindal	was	born	to	Dildar	three	years	later,	in	1519.
p.326	Maham	did	beg	Babur	–	even	before	Hindal	was	born	–	to	let	her	adopt	Dildar’s	child	and	he
agreed.

p.329	The	sultan	had	several	‘Great	Bombards’,	one	of	which	is	today	in	the	Fort	Nelson	Museum	in
Portsmouth,	UK.
p.351	The	battle	of	Panipat	was	fought	on	20	April	1526.
p.383	 In	 his	 memoirs	 Babur	 recorded	 meticulously,	 and	 in	 detail,	 the	 dreadful	 effects	 on	 his
digestive	system	of	the	meal	poisoned	on	Buwa’s	orders.
p.391	Babur’s	garden	in	Agra	was	sited	across	the	Jumna	from	the	spot	where	his	direct	descendant,
Shah	Jahan,	built	the	Taj	Mahal	as	the	mausoleum	for	his	dead	wife,	Mumtaz	Mahal.	Shah	Jahan
modified	Babur’s	garden	to	make	it	into	a	scented	moonlight	garden	from	which	he	could	view
his	lost	wife’s	tomb	across	the	Jumna.
p.397	The	battle	of	Khanua	was	fought	on	17	March	1527.
p.429	Babur	died	on	26	December	1530,	eight	months	after	Humayun	had	fallen	ill.
p.430	 Babur’s	 grave	 in	 his	 gardens	 above	 Kabul	 fell	 into	 dilapidation	 and	 was	 subsequently
damaged	during	the	recent	troubles	in	Afghanistan.	It	and	the	gardens	have	been	restored	under
the	auspices	of	UNESCO	and	the	Aga	Khan’s	Foundation.

image

